The history of the campagne in the Spanish Netherlands, Anno Dom. 1694 with the journal of the siege of Huy
D'Auvergne, Edward, 1660-1737.

By EDWARD D'AUVERGNE, M. A. Rector of St. Brelade, in the Isle of JERSEY, and Chaplain to Their Majesties Regiment of Scots Guards.

LONDON, Printed for Matt. Wotton, at the Three Daggers; and John Newton, at the Three Pigeons, near Temple-Barr, in Fleet-street, 1694.


Imprimatur,

Novemb. 20. 1694.
EDWARD COOKE.
[page]
To the Honourable MAJOR-GENERAL RAMSAY, Colonel of Their Majesties Regiment of Scots Guards, &c.

SIR,
I Need not make an Apology for Pre∣senting the Account of the Last Cam∣pagne to You; for since Custom will have every Trifle that is publish'd, at∣tended with an Epistle Dedicatory, I should be very Ungrateful, if I did not embrace this Oc∣ccasion to acknowledge to the World the many Obligations I have to You: Though, to acquit my self of it, I must put your Ho∣nourable Name to a Piece in which I am sen∣sible You must find a great many Faults. For, 'tis impossible that a Man should judge so
[page]
Justly and Equally of the Affairs of War, as to give an Account of them free from any Mi∣stakes, unless he has as great a share in the Ma∣nagement of them as You have. However, I am very glad it gives me the Opportunity to express, in some measure, my Gratitude for Your Favours.

When the Dean of Winchester (whom I must acknowledge for the Author of my Happiness, in belonging to You) recommended me to be Chaplain to Your Regiment, I cannot forget how willing you was to Receive me; as if you had been long expecting an Opportunity of Doing Good to a Friend, though I was then a Stranger to You: This Favour was, indeed, more than I could expect. But Your Generosity stopt not here; You have treated me ever since, with so much Civility and Obli∣ging Kindness, that I cannot be silent, but must own the Thankful Sense I have of it as publickly as I can. I must yet value Your Fa∣vours the more, that they come from a Person of so much Worth and Merit, that you excuse and free me from the common Fault of others, in swelling an Epistle with Praise and Commen∣dations; the whole Army knows more of it than
[page]
my mean Rhetorick can express. Those who have been at the Siege of Maestricht, and the Bat∣tel of St. Denis, repeat with Pleasure, to this day, the early Proofs You gave of Your Martial Con∣duct and Courage. Your Vertue and Valour has ever since encreas'd with Your Honour; and this present War has done you Justice, in raising You to such Considerable Posts in the Army, as have given a better Light to Your Merit. I could speak with Pleasure of Your Exploits in the Battle of Steenkirk, where the Brigade under Your Conduct and Command did such Considerable Service: And in that of Landen, where You fought with so much Vi∣gour and Bravery, that (notwithstanding the Inequality of the Number) You often Re∣gain'd Your Post, and Repuls'd several times the victorious Enemy: Your Brigade was then in the Right Wing; where the Elector of Ba∣varia was a joyful Witness of Your Valour and Conduct, which He express'd in the kindest and the most endearing manner.

But I remember I am writing an Epistle, and not your History. I shall say no more, but, That You are a Soldier of the KING's Own Ma∣king, and that You have been Train'd in His
[page]
Service from Your Infancy. His Majesty is an Excellent Judge of Merit, which is the Standard by which He measures His Favours: So that though Your Birth is Great and Noble, yet 'tis Your Own Personal Worth that has Rais'd You to be Major-General of Their Majesty's Forces. If You owe a Noble Birth to the Earls of Dal∣housy, You sufficiently repay the Nobility of Your Extraction with Your Great Vertues and Accomplishments, which make You now the Ornament of Your Family.

May You Live, long to enjoy these Rewards of Your Worth and Vertue; and whatever else is laid up in the Stores of a Great, Just, and Bountiful Monarch. May You live to enjoy them for Their Majesty's Service, the Comfort of Your Vertuous and Excellent Lady, the Pro∣sperity of Your Family, the Joy of Your Friends, and the Honour and Credit of Your Nation. These are the Hearty Prayers and Wishes of

SIR,
Your Most Obliged, Humble, and Obedient Servant, Ed. D'Auvergne.
[page]
TO THE READER.

THIS being the Third Account I publish of this kind, I would venture it without the Ceremony of of a Preface, if I was not obliged to excuse some Faults which may happen in the Impression: For I Write so ill my self, that I have been forc'd to get it Copy'd, to make it legible: I could not get the same Hand that Tran∣scrib'd the last: It has now been Copy'd with some Faults; which I could not Correct, without making it as difficult to Read as the Original. But I have recommended it to Friends, who cannot only Correct the Faults of the Copyer, but my Own too: Which Favour I beg from them, since my own Affairs here will not permit me to be in England to see it Printed.

I shall only add, That I have us'd all possible Diligense to give an Exact and Impartial Account of Affairs, to inform the People of England (that have so great a share in the Burden of this Present War) of the Truth; and to disabuse them of many Stories impos'd upon them; some, by the Enemies of the Present Government, and Friends to the French Interest; and others, by some Bigotted Na∣tional People, who do their utmost to foment H•a•s and Animosities between the several Nations concern'd in the
[page]
Common Cause, who therefore are as great Enemies to it, as the Open and Profess'd Enemies of the Government.

I cannot excuse this, nor any of the former Accounts, from several Mistakes. When a Man is stinted to a Time, for the Publishing such Matters, which would otherwise be out of season, after so long Consulting of Friends, which, it may be, would inform me better; Errors, in such a Case, cannot be avoided: But where I have been guilty of Mistakes, I shall not think it shame, but my Duty to own it.

I dare say, this Present War now is drawing near to a happy End; and if God grants me Life to have my share in the Blessings of Peace, I will publish all the particular Accounts together of the several Campagnes I have seen in Flanders, exactly Corrected and Amended, with the Draughts and Planes of the Battles and Sieges: and I will use my best Endeavours to free them from all Errors and Mistakes, by a diligent Search into Authentick Papers; and a strict Enquiry among all the Knowing Persons of the Army, the Honour of whose Friendship and Kindness I may pretend to, several of them having been very wil∣ling to assist me in what I have already done; and I need not doubt of the same Favour, when there shall be Time and Leisure to bring the Work to Perfection.

BRUGES, Novemb. 5/15. 1694.
[1]
THE HISTORY OF THE CAMPAGNE IN THE Spanish Netherlands, Anno Dom. 1694.

OUR Last Year's History left Both Armies going into Winter-Quarters, the French on their side flush'd with a considerable Victory, and with the Success they had in the Siege of Charleroy, with which they closed the Last Campagne; and though they never had a greater Occasion to be stirring, than during the last Winter-Quarters, yet the French have not been so quiet all this War, as they were at that time. The French King knew very well that the Allies were unani∣mously resolved to augment considerably their Forces on all sides, and to bring such Armies in the Field the following Campagne, as might put a stop to the Progress of his Arms,
[2]
and oblige him to be now on the Defensive, who before had been so Violent and so Successful an Aggressor.

And though Alliances are attended with great Inconveni∣ences, and that the Operations of Allied Armies cannot be so Active and Brisk, as when they are the Results of one Single, Wise, and Absolute Head; yet, on the other side, they have this great Conveniency and Advantage, that when there is a good and perfect Correspondence between Allied Powers, their very Defeats improve their Strength, and they gather Power from their own Disadvantages; because that makes them the more sensible of the Greatness of the Com∣mon Enemy, and of the necessity of a Mutual and Vigorous Defence; and the Spring and Sources of War, both for Money and Men, being many, they can with so much the more Ease to their respective States, not only recruit, but augment their Forces. We have had good experience of this Truth in the present War, in which the Allies have kept a better Union and Correspondence than they had in any former Alliances.

The great Victory which the French had over Prince Waldeck, in the Plains of Fleuri, served to bring an Army into the Field, even the latter end of the same Campagne, of 70000 Men: which has since oblig'd the French King to augment his Forces to so vast a Number, to keep up the Credit of his successful Armies, that he has entirely exhausted his Treasures, and now finds himself push'd to such a non-plus, that far from being able to augment his Forces, as the Allies have done since the Battel of Landen, he is hardly able to pay those he has now on foot; and which is worst of all, whereas before he supply'd the want of Money, in some measure, by making his Armies subsist in the Enemies Coun∣trey, he has had the Mortification, this Campagne, to see them eat and destroy his own Frontiers. There was there∣fore a certain Necessity that the French should, in common Prudence, have undertaken something the last Winter, which was the only Time they had left to keep up the Credit and Reputation of their Arms.

[3]
And as there was a Necessity for them to have done some∣thing then; so (I may say) they have not had a fairer Oppor∣tunity all this War, if we consider either the State of our Army, or the Posture and Condition of Affairs in this Countrey. Our Army had been weaken'd by the Overthrow at Landen: And though our Losses were far from being so considerable as the French made it, yet no doubt it did very much dis∣concert our Affairs; and besides, the Soldiers wading tho∣rough the Geet to make their escape, and lying wet for seve∣ral Days after, caused many Sicknesses amongst them, inso∣much that our English and Scotch Forces never wanted more Recruits than they did the last Winter; and they have not yet been later in bringing their Recruits over, and in Com∣pleating their Regiments: so that in respect of our Army, the French never had a greater Encouragement to put them upon some Action.

And as for the Posture and Condition of Affairs, in rela∣tion to the Countrey, the Death of the late Bishop of Liege, and the following Dissentions of the Chapter, gave the French King the happiest Opportunity he could wish for, to have driven the Allies out of that Place; which, no doubt, would have made room for the Cardinal of Bouillon's Pretensions in the following Election, and would have given him a great share in the Suffrages of the Chapter. And though the Pope has given so authentick a Confirmation of the Justice of the Elector of Cologne's Cause in the last disputed Election, yet if the French had made themselves Masters of Liege the last Winter, 'tis very probable that the Cardinal of Bouillon would have found more Favour at the Court of Rome in this Suit; and that the Committee of Cardinals deputed for that pur∣pose, would have found a great deal of Right on his side in the French Canon Law, to have placed that Mitre upon his Head: And the Cardinal de Bouillon being absolutely the French King's Creature, he could then have look'd upon the Principality of Liege as in a manner his own, and thus have advanc'd his Frontier to the very Gates of Maestricht, which, as to its Civil Government, is equally divided between the States-General and the Bishop of Liege; which then would
[4]
have open'd to him an Inlet into the States Dominions, the thing he has so much long'd for, and has been so much endeavouring after all this present War. As for Newport, and the Frontiers in Flanders, the King provided for their Safety, by sending the last Winter a speedy Supply of Eight Battalions from England; Tiffeny and the three French Re∣giments first, who were quarter'd in the Camerlings Ambacht, (for so the Countrey is call'd about the Canal of Newport,) and afterwards Lloyd, St. George, Friderick Hamilton, and Co∣lonel Ingoldsby's Regiments, which were dispos'd into Quar∣ters, for a time, in Ostend and Newport; but still I dare say, that the rest of our Army was in no very good Condition to have taken the Field, if the French had undertaken any Siege during the Winter.

All this being consider'd, no other Reasons can be alledged why the French were so quiet all the last Winter, and so contrary to their Interest, which oblig'd them to some Action, but these following. First, The Dearth and Famine that raigned in France, and in the Conquer'd Countrey; which was indeed greater than can be expressed, or than can hardly be believ'd; though the French Court, and the King by his Edicts, us'd all possible means to prevent it, and to cover the inward Sufferings of his Kingdom. We have seen in Bruges, and in most of our Towns in Flanders, very lamen∣table Instances of it, where they fled from the neighbouring Parts of France, and the Paiis Conquis, for Bread; and many of them had been so long without it, that though they had Bread given them, yet they could not eat it, and died in the Streets: They came in such Multitudes, that the Magistrates have been forced to stand Centries at the Gates, to hinder them from coming in: But since they have had a fruitful Harvest in France, his Edicts acknowledge in plain Terms, what but some Months before they smother'd over with fine Words, to amuse and deceive the People. The French King, for this Reason, could not supply and fill his Stores with Corn, a Thing absolutely necessary for a Winter Cam∣pagne: His Subjects were Hungry, and began to be Loud and Clamorous; which, if his Purveyors had bought up the
[5]
Corn of the Countrey to fill the King's Stores, might easily have been improved into a Revolt; for Seditions and Tu∣mults about it there had been many in several Provinces of his Kingdom. The Second Reason, was, Because his own Infantry, notwithstanding the Victory at Landen, had been so well handled there, and had been so fatigu'd in the Siege of Charleroy, that his Battalions were so weak, they could not be in a Condition to serve in a Winter Siege, though the Misery of his Countrey supplied his Army with raw Soldiers enough to recruit them. The Third, was, The ill Condition of his Cavalry; which, besides the Losses of the foregoing Campagne, must be very much weaken'd by the want of Forage, the necessary Consequence of the Famine at home, insomuch, that whereas the French Troups had before the same complement with ours, yet the last Winter they were reduced to Forty a Troup; which does sufficiently shew that the French King wanted Horses, and that he could not re-mount his Cavalry. The Fourth Reason, was, The want of Money, which is justly called the Sinews of War, and without which, the best concerted Designs must miscarry: And the Scarceness of Money was so great in his Army, that they subsisted all the last Winter upon Credit in their several Quarters; even the very Lieutenants and Ensigns were or∣der'd to have Credit in the Publick-Houses and Vivandiers, the first for a Groat, and the latter for Three-pence a Day to subsist them. I may write this for Truth, because 'twas the Report *here last Winter; and I enquired of Officers that were Prisoners this Summer in our Army, who owned it to have been so. Whilst the French King's Affairs were so at Home, the Allies were encreasing their Forces, and making new Levies in England, the Empire, Holland, Flanders and Italy, to endeavour to turn the Scale of the War, which hitherto had turn'd so prosperously and successfully on the French King's side. And the Event of this Campagne is a convincing Argument that they have not bestow'd their Money in vain: That the French King has hitherto ow'd his Success more to the Number of his Troops, than to their Bravery. Though I do not say this to lessen the Praise and
[6]
Commendation they deserve, but only to fix and settle the Judgment of Things in an equal Ballance; which is the right and just way of judging of Success in Military and other Affairs.

[ May 8.] This was the State and Condition of Things the last Winter, and towards the Opening of this Campagne; about which time the King came over from England, to put Himself at the Head of the Confederate Army in Flanders, though later than His Majesty had done hitherto: But the Settling of the Fund for the Army, Navy, and New Levies, had drawn the Sessions of Parliament to such a length, that the King could not come over sooner. After the King's Arrival in Holland, His Majesty having had some Conferences with the States-General and Ministers of the Allies at the Hague, went, for some few Days, to take his usual Divertise∣ments at Loo; but Orders were sent to all Garrisons to be ready to March and take the Field: though the French still continued very quiet in their Frontiers, without making any Motions to form a Camp.

On the 17th of May, Sir Henry Bellasis received Orders to March the next Day with the Garrisons of Bruges, Ostend, and those quarter'd upon the Canal of Newport, to form a Camp by Ghendt. The Cavalry march'd out some Days be∣fore, to canton upon the Countrey for Forage: and the Forces quarter'd in the Frontiers of Holland, and the Garrison of Brussels, received Orders about the same time to March and form a Camp at Bethlehem and Terbank, near Louvain, under the Command of the Duke of Holstein. On the 18th. of May, Eleven Battalions marched out of the Garrison of Bruges; and were joyn'd by the Four Regiments that had been upon the Canal of Newport, Two Battalions from Ostend, One from Damme, and one from Sluys: Those from Bruges were of the Scots Guards, Two Battalions; the Royal Regiment, One Battalion, (the second was left in Garrison;) Granville, Tidcomb, Castleton, Ingoldsby, Mackay, Graham, Offarrell and Maitland: from the Canal Tiffeny, La Meloniere, Belcastel and Marton: from Ostend, Lauder's and Ferguson's; (Argyle's Regi∣ment
[7]
[ May.] remain'd in Garrison:) from Damme, Lloyd: from Sluys, St. Amand, being the Regiment lately Commanded by Count Horne: These, to the number of Nineteen Batta∣lions, march'd that day about half-way to Ghendt, upon the Canal of Bruges, being Commanded by Sir Henry Bellasis, and Major-General Ramsay. The next day they march'd on to Ghendt, and encamp'd at Mary Kirk, where the Duke of Wirtemberg and the Count de Nassau came out of the Town to see them; where they halted till the 21st. That day they march'd thorough Ghendt, making their way to the Canal of Brussels: And this same day the Garrison of Ghendt, com∣posed of Three Battalions of English Guards, the Fusiliers, and Seven Battalions of Danes, march'd out of the Town and joyn'd them: The Zealand Battalion of Danes remain'd in Garrison, and Colonel Selwin was put in the Brigade Commanded by Sir David Collier: The Regiments of St. George, and Frederick Hamilton, that had left their Garrison of Ostend to be more conveniently quarter'd near Ghendt, upon the Canal of Bruges, joyn'd them likewise this day; and Count Nassau's Regiment, from the Sas van Ghendt. Count Nassau, as Eldest Major-General, put himself in this March at the Head of this Body of Foot; and the Duke of Wirtem∣berg went on before, to wait upon the King at his Arrival at the Camp at Bethlehem. But out Train of English Artil∣lery that had remain'd all the Winter in Ghendt, was not yet ready, for want of Horses; for which reason, Sir David Collier was left there with Selwyn, Granville, Tidcomb, Castleton, Graham, Offarrel, Ferguson and la Meloniere's Regiment, to guard the Train, when it should come up to the Army: Which Brigade of Foot encamp'd on the other side of the Town, upon the Way to Dendermond. All the English Horse and Dragoons march'd the same day out of Ghendt, being joyn'd by the Foreign Horse, upon English Pay, that had quarter'd in Bruges, and canton'd upon the Villages between Brussels and Dendermond, being Commanded by Monsieur d' Auverquerque. The Dutch Cavalry did the same in the Vil∣lages between Tongres, Maestricht and Hassel, Commanded by the Lord of Athlone, General of the Horse.

[8]
The *Boors had suffer'd so much between Brussels, Louvain and the Meuse, the former Campagnes, in which their Coun∣trey had been foraged by the Armies, that this Year they had neglected the Tilling of the Ground, being unwilling to work in vain. This obliged us to canton our Cavalry, which retarded very much the Operations of this Campagne, which we were to open in this Countrey where the greatest Scarceness of Forage was. Whilst our Garrisons were thus filing off to form the Camp by Louvain, the French, on their side, began to leave their Winter Quarters, and to March towards the Countrey between the Sambre and the Meuse, where the General Rendezvous was appointed: And the Marshal de Boufflers gathered together another Body made up of the Garrisons beyond the Meuse, in the County of Chiney, between the Bishoprick of Liege and the Paiis de Luxem∣bourg.

The 24th. the King came to the Camp that had been form'd near the Cloister of Terbank, where His Majesty found Thirty six Battalions of Dutch Infantry; and the Regiments of Churchill, Trelawney, and Erle, that had been quarter'd the Winter at Malines: And the same day the Dutch Guards left their Winter Quarters upon the Canal of Brussels, to come up to the Camp. His Majesty took his Quarters at the Abbey of Bethlehem; where he was waited upon by the Electors of Bavaria and Cologne, who had left Brussels the same day for that purpose, to Complement his Majesty upon his Arrival to the Army.

The 26th. the English Infantry, under the Command of Count Nassau, Sir Henry Bellasis, and Major-General Ramsey, pass'd the Canal of Brussels, at Vilvorde, and encamp'd at Stannokezeel: And the Dutch Guards arriv'd at the same time at Bethlehem, where they encamp'd upon the King's Quarter, to mount the Guard. The 27th. the Eight Battalions that had been left at Ghendt, under the Command of Brigadier Col∣lier, to guard the English Train of Artillery, came up to Vil∣vorde, where they encamp'd between it and Grimberg, along the Canal: The Artillery was sent by Water to Malines, where the Artillery-Horses had been order'd to come from
[9]
Holland. The 28th. the Body of Foot encamp'd at Stannokezeel, being joyn'd by Stanley and Collingwood's Regiments from Den∣dermond, march'd to the General Rendezvous by Louvain, and encamp'd upon two Lines, with the Right at the King's Quarter at Bethlehem, and the Left towards Louvain. Three or four Dutch Regiments encamp'd in the same Line upon the Left. The 31st. the King review'd all the English In∣fantry that was come up to the Camp, in the presence of the Electors of Bavaria and Cologne, who were come from Brus∣sels to be at the Review; and they appear'd in very good Order, Cloaths and Accoutrements.

The French (as we have said before) had mark'd their General Rendezvous on the other side of the Sambre, be∣tween it and the Meuse, where, by this time, most of the Army was come up; but still they continued canton'd upon the Country, both Foot and Horse, for the Preservation of Forage: Which thing was very carefully look'd after on both sides. The 20th. the Marshals of Luxemburgh and Vil∣leroy came to Head the Army canton'd near the Sambre, and the Infantry drew out to form a Camp: And the 22d. the Dauphin, whom the French King had appointed to make this Campagne in Flanders, as Generalissimo of his Forces, both to get the Knowledge and Experience of a General; and also, because where there are several Mareschals of France in an Army, it has been a Rule generally observed by the French Court, to put a Prince of the Blood-Royal over them, to prevent Disputes. The Dauphin was follow'd by the Dukes of Chartres and Bourbon, and other Princes of the Blood: And the Armies, on both sides, were now come to their General Rendezvous, and all things ready for the Open∣ing of the Campagne.

[ June] The 3d. day of June, the Army decamped from Beth∣lehem and Terbank, and pass'd the Dyle by Louvain, at Havre: We march'd by the Camp we had last Year at Park Abbey, and the Defiles of the Bois de Merdal; but all along this March we could hardly find any Corn upon the Ground, but here and there, it may be, half an Acre: The Boors had left the Coun∣trey
[10]
so bare, that they boasted of Starving both Armies into a Peace. The King took his Quarter, after this days March, on the other side of the Bois de Merdal, at the Cloyster of St. Hertogendale, in French Valeduc, a Cloyster of Nuns-of the Order of St. Bernard, (not Benedictins, as I said in my last Year's Account, through a mistake:) And the Army encamp'd with the Right at Tourine Bavechein, Two Parishes that have but One Curate, and belonging to the Diocess and Princi∣pality of Liege, though surrounded on all sides with the Coun∣trey of Brabant. The Left of the Army went by the Vil∣lages of Sluys and Meldert, and reach'd as far as Hoexem, within an English Mile of Tilmont. The Brigade of Guards encamped upon a Line by the Cloyster of Valeduc, to cover the King's Quarter. The whole Army was here dispos'd into Brigades, and interlin'd with a Brigade of Horse, and a Brigade of Foot; so that a Brigade of Foot in the Front, was sustain'd by a Brigade of Horse in the Rear: But because the Cavalry was not yet come up, Intervals were left accordingly in both Lines, till they should joyn the Army. The English Horse and Dragoons, upon this March, left their Quarters between Brussels and Dendermond, and advanc'd to the Villages between Malines, Louvain, and Tilmont, where they canton'd, as before; and My Lord Athlone left the Neighbourhood of Tongres, to canton the Dutch Cavalry nearer our Army, between Hassel, St. Tron, and Leauwe. The 4th. we were joyn'd by the Eight Regiments under the Command of Bri∣gadier Collier, which we had left encamped at Vilvorde; and and by Ten Battalions under the Command of Lieutenant-General Tettau, which had march'd out of the Garrisons of Maestricht, Tongres, and Hassel; Four of them were some of the Swiss Regiments which the States-General had rais'd the last Winter for their Service. The French being informed of our March to the Camp at Valduc, had just Reason to fear lest we should advance farther towards the Sambre; for which Reason they pass'd this River on the 4th. and encamp'd at Gemblours, where the Dauphin took up his Quarter. He re∣view'd all his Forces here, and dispos'd them into an Order of Battel; of which you may read the List following.

[11]
The Order of the French Army at the Camp at Gemblours, being Commanded by the Dauphin; and under him, by the Mareschals of Luxembourg and Villeroy.
RIGHT WING
First Line.
Lieutenant-Generals,
Duc de Bourbon,
Monsieur de Rose.
Major-Generals,
Duc d'Elbeuf,
Duc de Roquelaure.
Monsieur de Gassion Commanding the Troups of the King's House.
Brigades.	Regim.	Squad.
 	Grenadiers, Du Roy	2
Noailles	2
Duras	2
Luxembourg	2
Lorges	2
Gensd' armes	1
Chevaux Legers	1
Montgon	Cuirassiers	3
Bourbon	2
La Feuillade	2
Villequier	2
Rottembourg	Rottembourg	3
Roquespine	3
Rohan	2
Phelipeaux	Orleans	2
Dauphin	3
Cravates	3
 	 	Squadrons 37
Second Line.
Lieutenant-General, Monsieur de Ximenes.
Major-General, Duc de Montmorency.
Brigades.	Regim.	Squad.
Praslin	Royal Roussillon	3
La Valiere	3
Levis	3
La Tournelle	3
Rassent	Rassent	3
Manderscheid	3
Vaillac	3
La Bessiere	Aubeleterre	3
Imecourt	3
Fiene	3
La Bessiere	3
 	 	Squadrons 33
[12]
Body of FOOT
First Line.
Lieutenant-Generals,
Prince of Conti,
Duke of Berwick.
Major-General, Marquis de Crequi.
Brigades.	Regim.	Battal.
Dantin	Navarre	3
Languedoc	2
Surville,	Du Roy.	4
Cadrieux	Dauphin	3
Thoulouse	2
Albergoti	Humieres	2
Royal Italien	1
La Marche	1
Caraman	Gardes Françoises	3
Gardes Swisses.	2
Charots	Vermandois	2
Haynaut	1
Motroux	1
L'Abadie	Guiche	2
Gardes Angloises	2
Villeroy	Lionnois	2
Roussillon	2
De Lux	Provence	2
Piedmont	3
 	 	Battal. 40
Second Line.
Lieutenant-Generals,
Feuquieres,
Rubantel.
Major-General, Monsieur de Castres.
Brigades.	Regim.	Battal.
Pompane	Bourbonnois	2
Artois	1
Chartres	1
La Marre	1
Reinold Suisse	Stouppa	4
Reinold	4
Monim	2
Zurbeck Suisse	Zurbeck	4
Greder	4
Cavoye	Cavoye	1
Soissonois	1
Blesois	1
Bugey	1
Senneterre	1
Greder	Greder Aleman	2
Angoumois	1
Periguex	1
Lignieres	1
Tulles	1
Surlanbe	Royal Danois	2
Surlanbe	2
Crussol	2
 	 	Battal. 40
[13]
LEFT WING
First Line.
Lieutenant-Generals,
Duc du Maine,
Monsieur de Montrevel.
Major-Generals,
Count de Marsin.
Monsieur de Vandeuil.
Brigades.	Regim.	Squad.
Souternon	Du Roy	3
Bourgogne	3
Thoulouse	2
Furstemberg	2
Du Mesiul,	Carabiners	16
Chaludes	Villeroy	2
Du Maine	2
Berry	2
Maistre de Camp General	3
 	 	Squadrons 35
Second Line
Lieutenant-General, Busca
Major-General, Count de Nassau.
Brigades.	Regim.	Squad.
Lagny	Lagny	3
Pujeol	3
St. Lieu	3
Thisenhau∣sen	Lully	3
Villers	3
Melun	3
Cossé	2
Massot	Quadt	3
Clermont	3
Massot	3
Chartres	2
 	 	Squadrons 31
[14]
Body of RESERVE.
Due de Chartres, General.
Major Generals, Messieurs de Bezons, & de Mailly.
Brigades.	Regiments.	Squadrons.
 	Hussars	1
Mousquetaires gris	2
Mousquetaires noirs	2
 	Dragons.	 
Cailus	Colonel-General	3
Cailus	3
Chenteran	3
Battalions	 
Royal Artillery	2
Artillery, consisting of 66 Pieces of Cannon, besides Mortars.	 
Regiment of Bombardiers besides Gunners and Matrosses.	1
 	Dragons.	 
Davaret	La Reine	3
Davaret	3
St. Ermine	3
Asfeldt	Fimarçon	3
Asfeldt	3
 	 	Squadrons 29
 	 	Battalions 3
[15]
So that according to this List, the Dauphin had Sixty and Nine Squadrons in the First and Second Line of his Right Wing of Horse, and Sixty and Six in the Left, and Twenty and Nine Squadrons of Dragons, Hussars and Mousquetairs in the Reserve, which makes in all 164 Squadrons. And because the French had reformed their Troups of Horse, last Winter, to Forties, we must compute each of their Squa∣drons to be, at their coming in the Field, of 120 Horse-men; which makes the Total of the Horse and Dragons of this Army to be 19680. The Foot consisted of Forty Battalions in the First Line, and Thirty Nine in the Second, and Three in the Reserve, which makes in all 82 Battalions; which, at 600 Men each Battalion, at the first coming into the Field, amounts to 49100 Men. So that the Total of this Army, Commanded by the Dauphin, and under him by the Mar∣shals of Luxembourg and Villeroy, came to 68880 Men, besides what belonged to the Artillery, as Gunners and Matrosses, Miners, &c. We shall not make a Computation of all the Forces the French had in Flanders, till we come to speak of the Bodies Commanded by the Marshal de Boufflers, the Mar∣quis de Harcourt, and the Marquis de la Valette; which shall be in their proper Places.

The Dauphin being come with this Army to Gemblours, within a Day's March from ours; likewise there being but little Forage about our Camp, which hinder'd the Cavalry from subsisting in it; the King, for this Reason, order'd to make a Retrenchment to cover our Body of Foot, in case the Enemy would have come to attack us. Our Right was cover'd by the Villages of Tourine and Bavechein; the first being just upon the brow of a Hill, below which runs a small Current which has its Spring at Bavechein, and so goes by Ham, and other Villages, into the River Dyle: The Bri∣gade of Guards encamped upon another Hill, separated from the Right of the Main Body by this Current, and cover'd the King's Quarter. The Left was cover'd by deep, hollow Ways, and other Defiles of the Villages of Sluys and Meldert, and a little Brook which rises at Meldert, and so runs by Hoexem, Oirbeck, and Cumtick, to Tilmont: The Ground was
[16]
Plain between the Villages of Bavechein upon the right, and Sluys upon the left, for about an English Mile and an half upon the Center of our Line; which Plain went from the Village of Bossu, and the Abbey of Florival, cross our Camp towards Tilmont: and again on the other side of the Villages of Sluys and Meldert, towards Judoigne. The French took up this Camp last Year, when we were encamped at Park, stretching their Line along the Plain from the Abbey of Flo∣rival towards Tilmont, with the Villages of Tourine and Ba∣vechein in their Front, and Sluys and Meldert in their Rear, where they had their Head-Quarter. And the Year before, we encamped one Night in this Plain, stretching our Left another way, towards Judoigne; and the King's Quarter at Meldert; and our Right near the Bois de Merdal; which now at this Camp of Hertogendale remained in our Rear. This was the Situation of our Camp; so that nothing remain'd open to the Enemy but the Plain upon our Centre; which the King, upon the coming of the French to Gemblours, or∣derd to be fortified with a Retrenchment from Bavechein to Sluys and Meldert. We had several Parties toward the Sambre, to observe the Motions of the French; and upon their March to Gemblours they took many Prisoners which had straggled from the Army, among which were some of the late King's Guard. The 5th. the Three Second Battalions of Guards, and Eppinger's Dragons, were ordered to encamp on the other side of the King's Quarter, between it and the Bois de Merdal, to cover it from Parties skulking in the Wood. The 6th. the English Artillery came up from Malines, under the Escort of Brewer, Lesley, and Buchan's Regiments, which joyn'd us this Day. These Three Regiments, with those of Strathnaver and Hamilton, had come but lately from Scotland; they were put in Quarters at Leer and Malines, to put themselves in a Con∣dition to take the Field, and Strathnaver and George Hamilton were sent to Ghendt. Our English Train of Artillery con∣sisted of Sixty Pieces of Cannon and Six Mortars, Four Companies of Gunners and Matrosses, and One Company of Miners, all of One Hundred Men each. This same day we were also joyn'd by the Cavalry, who came up only to be
[17]
review'd, and encamp'd by Brigades in the several Intervals that had been left for them, (as we have said before.) The King review'd, the same day, the Eight Regiments which had come up to the Camp the 4th under the Command of Briga∣dier Collier, in the presence of the Electors of Bavaria and Cologne, who had left Brussels to come to Louvain, to be nearer the Army, where His Electoral Highness expected his own Bavarian Foot and Dragoons, to form a Camp of his own near Louvain. The day following, the King review'd all the Horse that had come up the day before, the Electors being present: And as the several Regiments were reviewed, they march'd again to their respective Quarters where they had been before; the English, upon the Villages between Louvain, Arschot, and Tilmont; and the Dutch, towards Hassel and Leauwe; and appear'd all of them, both Men and Horse, in very good Condition and Order. We were very careful for the Conservation of Forage, which was but scarce in this Countrey. The Horse, for this reason, continued can∣ton'd; and the Foot had Orders to cut down no Corn, upon pain of Death. On the 8th. the French march'd from Gemblours by One in the Morning, to Bonef, upon the Me∣hagine where the Dauphin had his Quarter. For which rea∣son, the King ordered the Army to March the next day upon the Left, towards Tilmont, to be nearer, to observe the French, who were making their Motions between the Geet and the Jecker, towards Liege. Accordingly the Army march'd the next day towards Tilmont, and encamp'd with the Right at Roosebeck, where the King had his Quarter; and the Left upon the Geet, between Tilmont and Linther. Our Front was cover'd upon the Left with the River Geet, and the Town of Tilmont; the Center, with the Villages of Cumtich, and the little River that runs into the Geet at Tilmont. We had the little River Velpe in our Rear, that falls into the Geet below Leauwe. So that our Right only was open in the Camp between the Village of Cumtich and that of Roosebeck. The whole Body of Foot, consisting then of Eighty eight Battalions, encamped upon Two Regular Lines, and was dispos'd in the Brigades following. Of the English and
[18]
English Pay, the Brigade of Guards upon both Lines: Upon the First were the Brigades of Erle, Collier, and Alefeldt: In the Second Line, Stuart, Offarrel, and Haxhausen. Of the Dutch, Deden, Anhalt, and Heukelom: In the First Line, and Rat∣zauw, Holstein-Norburg and Bernstort: In the Second, which made Thirteen Brigades of Foot, Seven English, and Six Dutch.

The King, in the Winter, had made the Brigadiers Churchill and Ramsey, Major-Generals of his Forces: But at this Camp, the King declared Count Nassau (that had been Major-General ever since His Majesty's coming over to Eng∣land) Lieutenant-General; and the Colonels Fitz-Patrick and Offarrel, Brigadiers. And in the Dutch Army, the Count de Noyelles was declared Lieutenant-General by the King; and he made the Brigadiers Fagel, Salich, and l'Escluse, Major-Generals in the Infantry; and the Prince of Anhalt, the Duke of Holstein-Norburg, the Colonels Ratzauw and Dedem. Briga∣diers: And of the Horse, the Brigadiers Ittersum, Warfusé, Hubert, and Stain, were made Major-Generals; and the Co∣lonels Dompré, Roo, Lippe, Zell, Piper, and Montigny, were made Brigadiers. In the English Dragoons, Brigadier Ep∣pinger was made Major-General; and the Colonels, Mat∣thews and Wyne, Brigadiers. But because the Horse did not come into the Line of Battle in this Camp, I shall omit the inserting the List of the Army, till we come to the Camp at Mount St. André.

The 10th. the French Army decamp'd from Bonef, upon the Mehaigne, and marched into the Paiis de Liege, as far as St. Tron; the Dauphin's Quarter with the Right at this Place; the Left went along the Joar, or Jecker, almost as far as Warrem, which River remain'd then in their Rear. The same day, the King review'd Brewer, Lesley, and Buchan's Regiments, the last of our English Infantry that had come into the Field.

The 11th. the Marshal de Boufflers (whom we had left forming a small Body in the County of Chiney, and who, upon the Marching of the French Army into the Paiis de Liege, had drawn nearer to Huy) pass'd the Maes at Huy, and en∣camp'd
[19]
on the other side of the Jecker, between Warrem and the Mehaigne, where he flank'd the Left of the Army, and cover'd the Communication with Namur; which otherwise would have suffer'd very much by our Parties and Detach∣ments, which would have had very fair Play upon their Pro∣visions which should have come to their Camp. The List of his Army was as follows, but I could not get it dispos'd into Brigades.

The Marshal de Bouffler's Army.
CAVALRY.
Lieutenant-General, Monsieur de Bertillac.
Major-General, Monsieur de Lanion.
Regim.	Squad.
Commissary-General	3
—	2
Anjou	3
La Duretiere	3
Courtebonne	3
Petitpierre	2
Royal Aleman	3
Dragons du Roy	3
—de Gramont	3
 	Squadrons 25
INFANTRY.
Lieutenant-General, Count de Gassé.
Major-General, Baron de Bressey.
Regim.	Battal.
Poitou	2
Du Maine	2
La Reine	3
La Saar	1
Beauvesois	1
Foix	1
Nice	1
Berry	1
Arbauville	1
—	1
Royal Artillery.	1
 	Battalions 15
The Gentleman from whom I had this List did not under∣stand French, so that he abused several Names in the Copy; which I got rectified as much as I could, by informing my self from Prisoners: which I have done all to two Regiments,
[20]
which I could make nothing of: However, if there be any Mistake in the Names, there is none in the Summ. By which it appears, that the Marshal de Boufflers had, according to our foregoing Computation, 3000 Horse, and 9000 Foot, which amounts to 12000 Men.

The Marquis de Harcourt had form'd another Body of Horse and Dragons in the Paiis de Luxembourg, of between Twenty and Thirty Squadrons; but I have not seen a List of them. However, upon the Mareschal de Boufflers's passing the Meuse, he came with his Army, and encamped in the Condros.

At the same time, the Enemy formed another small Body, between Harlebeck and Courtray, under the Command of the Marquis de la Valette, Lieutenant-General of the French Forces, to cover their Line between the Lys and the Scheld, in case we should endeavour to make another Attempt on that side, as we had done the last Year. I have had a List of this Army, but with the same misfortune as the former, to be a little mangl'd, for want of knowing the Language; however, where the Names were not French, or doubtful, I have omitted them.

A List of the Army under the Command of the Mar∣quis de la Valette, Lieutenant-General.
CAVALRY.
Major-General,
Regim.	Squad.
 	Dauriac	3
 	Condè	2
 	Bissy	3
 	Courcelle	3
Dra∣gons	Asfeildt Estranger	3
Sully	3
 	 	Squadrons 17
INFANTRY.
Major-General, Count de Solré.
Regim.	Battal.
Orleans	2
Maulevrier	2
Anjou	2
Solré	1
Chivois	1
Fontenay	1
—	1
 	Battalions 10
[21]
Which, as we have before computed, must make 2040 Horse, and 6000 Foot. So that the French had in all, of Foot, in the Field, in Flanders, in the Dauphin, Boufflers, and La Valette's Army, 107 Battalions, which makes 64200 Foot: And of Horse in these Three Armies, and the Marquis de Harcourt's (which we shall suppose to be 20 Squadrons, which, I dare say, was the least,) 226 Squadrons; which, according to this Year's Computation of the French Squadrons, amounts to 27120 Horse. So that the Total of the Enemy's Forces in Flanders, both Foot and Horse, made 91320 fighting Men: Which is a very great Army, though inferiour to what they had the last Year.

The French King having sent his Fleet into the Mediter∣ranean, to make some considerable Conquest in Catalonia, had left his Coasts destitute of any Defence from the Sea; for which reason he was obliged to have some Forces dispers'd up and down the Provinces of Britany and Normandy, to prevent a Descent, and the Insults of our Fleet. Which he did effectually at the Bay of Camaret, though he had not the same Success in other Places

The French King likewise foreseeing that the Allies would have such an Army in Flanders the Campagne following, as would hinder any more Conquests on that side, thought it more convenient to make a considerable Detachment both of Horse and Foot, the last Winter, towards Catalonia; where the ill Posture of the Spanish Affairs gave him the Prospect of keeping up the Credit and Reputation of his Arms by some Conquests: And 'tis very probable that he would have pos∣sess'd himself of the whole Principality of Catalonia, if the King had not provided for its Safety, by sending our Fleet, under the Command of Admiral Russel, into the Streights. Which so much thwarted the French Designs, that they were forced to content themselves with the Taking of Palamos and Gironne, and to omit the more important Siege of Barcelona. This is the reason, that though the French had a very good Army in the Field this Campagne, in Flanders, yet it was very much inferiour to what they had at the Opening of the other Campagne. This Digression may be forgiven, since it
[22]
serves for a better understanding the Affairs of Flanders, with relation to former Campagnes.

To oppose this little Army of the Marquis de la Valette, of which we have now spoken, the Allies formed another of almost an equal strength, which encamped at Mary Kirk, upon the Canal of Bruges, just by the Walls of Ghendt, under the Command of the Count de Merode Thian, Serjeant-General de Battaille of the King of Spain's Forces, which consisted of Seven Battalions encamp'd, viz the Second Bat∣talion of the Royal Regiment, which (as we have said be∣fore) had remain'd in Bruges, at our going out to take the Field. And Argyle's Regiment which was left at Ostend; be∣sides the Regiments of Strathnaver, and Colonel George Ha∣milton; and Three Dutch, viz. Holle, Weed, and Grave John: Van Horne, the Count de Thian, had besides Three Terces, that is Regiments, of Walloon Foot quarter'd upon the Vil∣lages thereabouts, viz. the Marquis de Deinse, the Count de Grobendonk, and the Baron de Winterfelt, which were very well Cloathed, and in very good Order, both for the Num∣ber of Men, and their Accoutrements, and in a much better Condition than is usual with the Spanish and Walloon Terces in this Country. As for the Count de Thian's Cavalry, it consisted of Six or Seven Squadrons of Spanish Horse and Dra∣gons, whose List I cannot tell.

Having given this short Account of the State of the French Army, and the Two little Armies They and We had in Flan∣ders, under the Command of the Marquis de la Valette, and the Count de Thian, we must return to the Two Main Ar∣mies towards the Meuse. The 11th. in the Evening, we heard three Discharges of Cannon and Small-shot from the Enemy's Camp; which we heard, the next day, had been a Feu de Joye, for the Taking of Palamos, in Catalonia. The 12th. sixteen Hussars deserted from the French Camp, and came to our Army: These are Hungarian Horse, the Emperor has several Regiments of them upon the Rhine; and one of their Chief having deserted the Imperial Army about two Years since, so many were debauched by his Example, and for want of Pay, that the French King made a Regiment of
[23]
these Deserters, of which he sent a Squadron (which I believe was the whole Regiment) to serve this Campagne in Flanders, where they were farther from their Comrades in the Imperial Army, and where the French King thought they would have a less mind of deserting back again: But they found the French Pay so much less to their Satisfaction than that of the Emperor's, that they were at last weary of the French Service, and I believe that most of them have de∣serted this Summer from his Army: To which they were much encouraged by the Duke of Holstein, who receiv'd them all into his Service, and made a Troup of them, which he added to his Regiment of Dragons; and he generally had a Detachment of them for his Guard, when he went abroad. Their Hungarian Horses are little, but very swift, and en∣dure a great deal of fatigue; and they themselves are very dexterous Horse-men, though they make but an ill Figure on Horse-back: They have a little Saddle cover'd with Cloth, and a Houssen, cut like a Swallow's Tail, that hangs very low on both sides of the Horses Legs: They ride like the Orientals, very short, with their Knees almost to the Pomel of the Saddle; and when they gallop, they raise themselves up, learning forwards with their Heads upon the Horses Necks: They have round Furr Cups, with a long Head hanging behind their Backs; and Cloaks a l'antique, that hang down to their Heels, and the Capes to their Waste: They have under that, a short Wastcoat, and their Breeches and Stockings of a piece, and little Russia Leather Boots that come up half way their Legs: They have a very heavy Sabre, or Scimiter, which gives an effectual Stroak when it hits; but if they miss, those that have a light Sword have much the advantage of them, for 'tis then difficult to recover them∣selves. Their Officers have for all Distinction, Brass Fea∣thers sticking up an end in their Caps, just over their Fore∣heads: They are very good for Pursuits and Parties, and have generally had very good Success in this way against the Turks. The Heydukes are the Hungarian Foot, dress'd the same way, except the Cloak. I thought it convenient to give this Description of them, because their Names occurr
[24]
very often in the Gazettes, and, it may be, few know what they are, that read it.

The 12th▪ Fourteen Battalions of the Dutch were de∣tached from our Line, to encamp Half a League to the Rear of the Left, to possess and defend the Pass of the Abbey of Linther, upon the Geet, between Leauwe and Tilmont; which was a very convenient Post, not only to defend the Avenues to our Camp, but also to incommode the Enemy's Forage. This Detachment was put under the Command of a Dutch Major-General.

The 13th. the King rid out very early in the Morning, to observe the several Posts between his Camp and the E∣nemy's. The King had with him a strong Detachment of Horse, with which he pass'd both the Geets, and came very near the Enemy's Camp. His Majesty went over the Ground where we fought last Year at Landen; which he rid over se∣veral times, to observe exactly the Field of Battel, and re∣turned late in the Evening to the Camp. And there scarce happen'd a Day all along the Campagne, but that the King rid out towards the Enemy: Such are the Pains and Care His Majesty takes for the Welfare and Prosperity of the Common Cause.

The 15th. Seven Battalions more were detached to re∣inforce the Dutch Foot that had been posted near the Abbey of Linther; these were drawn out of our Forces, and put under the Command of Brigadier Erle: viz. Erle, Lesley, Lloyd, Mackay, Meloniere, Jutland, and Aver. The same Day, the Dauphin remov'd his Quarter from St. Tron, to the Village of St. Brusten, to settle here an Hospital for the Sick, to be near the Army. The same Day, the King had Advice from Maestricht, that no less than Four or Five hundred Swissers had deserted the French Army, and were come to that Place. Upon which, Orders were given, That these Regiments that wanted Recruits, should send an Officer to Maestricht, to get them among those Deserters: Many of them were of Monim's Regiment, which is the same as Brigadier Stouppa had, that died of the Wounds he receiv'd at the Battel of Steenkirk. That Stouppa was a Protestant, and had been a Minister;
[25]
but I was told, That Colonel No•im, who had the Regiment after him, was a Roman-Catholick, and had turn'd out the Minister that belong'd to the Regiment, and put a Priest in his Place: Which so disgusted his Soldiers, that it occasion'd a general Desertion in his Regiment.

The 16th. the King review'd Sir Thomas Levingstom's and Colonel Cunningham's Dragons, that had lately come over from Scotland; they were canton'd near the Town of Arschot. The same Day, the Mareschal de Boufflers march'd nearer to the Dauphin's Army, and passed the Jecker at Warem, where he encamp'd upon the Left of the French Army. Forty Suisse Deserters more came at the same time from the Enemy, and our Detachment brought in several Prisoners. My Lord Athlone came up likewise nearer to our Army this same Day, and took his Quarter upon the Left, at the Abbey of Linther.

On the 17th. because Bouffer's had now joyn'd the Dau∣phin's Army, and that we had only Foot in our Camp (the Horse being still canton'd in the Neighbourhood) which might have given the French an Occasion to attack us, 'twas order'd to fortifie our Camp, and to make a Retrenchment from the King's Quarter at the Village of Rooseheck, to that of Cumtich, the only Place open in our Camp, the rest was well covered, (as we have before described.)

We said before, that the Elector of Bavaria expected some of his own Forces, which he had sent for, to augment his Army this Campagne; they were now come to the Neighbourhood of Louvain, and consisted of Three Squa∣drons of Dragons of Count Philippe d' Areo, Three of Mo∣nasterol, Two Squadrons more of Cuirassiers of Weychel, Two Battalions of his Guards, Two Battalions of Riviera, and One of Horthansen; these joyn'd the Spanish Horse, and the Ba∣varian Cuirassiers, and made a Body near Louvain.

The 18th. they were review'd by the Elector, where the King was invited, and receiv'd with Three Salutes of Can∣non and Small-shot, and afterwards treated by the Elector.

The 19th. a Detachment of Danish Horse took Fifty six Prisoners, and brought them into the Camp with their
[22]
〈1 page duplicate〉
[23]
〈1 page duplicate〉
[24]
〈1 page duplicate〉
[25]
〈1 page duplicate〉
[26]
Officers: And the same Day, we had the first Forage, by Order; before, the Horses gras'd, in the Day-time, in the neighbouring Fields, and in Meadows; and the Men cut down Hay, which they brought along with them in the Evening, just enough for the Horses to subsist on in the Night: Standing Corn was scarce; and there was a Neces∣sity of Preserving it, else we should have had no Occasion for Retrenchments.

The 20th. a great many Deserters more came from the Enemy; and, indeed, there hardly pass'd a Day, but there came in some of them to our Camp, more or less The same Day, a Detachment of our Dragons brought in Se∣venty seven Prisoners: They fired upon the Vanguard, not thinking it had been the whole Detachment; but the rest rid up immediately, being a strong Detachment, and sur∣rounded the Wood, where the French had posted themselves in Ambuscade; and so they all yielded themselves Prisoners of War. At the same time, we took Two Dominican Fryers Prisoners, and an Irish Priest, that were come as Spyes into our Army: A Soldier of the late King James's Guards, that had deserted to us some Days before, and had taken Service in our English Guards, discover'd them: He knew they had pass'd between both Armies several times, particularly the two Dominicans, and that they had engaged to debauch as many as they could of our English Soldiers, to recruit the late King's Regiments in France; for which they were to receive a Luy d'ore a Man, for as many as they could bring over. They had an Irish Young Man with them; who being press'd to confess, own'd the Truth, and was afterwards an Evidence against them. After being Exa∣mined, they were Committed Prisoners severally in Tents, at the King's Quarter, and Centries continually set over them.

On the 21st. a Detachment of our Foot, posted at the Abbey of Linther, brought in Fourscore Prisoners; of which, some of them were Gensd'arms, and of the French King's Life-guards. The Detachment, from this Post, did very much incommode the French Army; and they seldom had a Forage∣day, but that they brought in several Prisoners.

[27]
The 22nd. the King review'd Brigadier Matthews and the Lord Fairfax's Dragons, which had come up to the Camp the Day before. Brigadier Matthews's Regiment encamped on the other side of the Village of Cumtich, which was with∣out the Retrenchment, to cover Monsieur d' Auverquerque's, and other General Officers Quarters there. My Lord Fair∣fax's Dragons encamped without the Defiles of the Village of Roosebeck, to cover the King's Quarter on that side. The same Day, several of the Enemy's Squadrons came in sight of our Camp, in the Plain on the other side of Tilmont. Upon which, the Major of the several Regiments upon the Right, had Orders to come to take the Posts of their Regi∣ments upon the Retrenchment, in case the French should come and attack us; and to see if the Retrenchments of their several Posts were well made, with a good defensible Breast∣work. I forgot to say, That the Town of Tilmont (the Dutch call it Tienen) which in this Camp was, before, the Left of our Army, was guarded by a Detachment of Three hundred Men, under the Command of a Field-Officer, and other Of∣ficers proportionably, which relieved one another every other Day: It is situated upon the greater Geet, which comes from Judoigne, and has several petty Cloysters and publick Build∣ings in it, with an old decayed Wall, and ruin'd Retrench∣ments about it: There is no Water near it, but the little River Geet, and 'tis commanded by the Countrey about it; for which reason, 'tis not capable of any good Fortifi∣cation.

The 24th. One of the French King's Carabiners deserted, and came to our Army: And the same Day we brought in Eight Prisoners; and an English Officer that was a Lieutenant in the Duke de Chartres his Regiment of Foot, and has served many Years in the French Army; the rest of his Party made their escape, and some of them were wounded. This Day, the Spanish and Bavarian Forces left the Neighbourhood of Louvain, and march'd up along the River Dyle, as far as Neer Ische. The Elector of Bavaria left Brussels at the same time, to come and Head his Army in this Place: (I shall reserve the List of these Forces, till we bring them all toge∣ther
[28]
at the Camp of Mount St. Andre: His Brother, the Elector of Cologne, accompany'd him the most part of this Campagne, being incognito in the Field; so that no Honours were paid to him by the Army. The same Day, Ten Drums, all of the Regiment of Piemont, deserted together, and came in their Livery-Coats to our Camp.

The 25th. we worked again at the Retrenchment, to make some of the Breast-works higher, which were found too low: and yet as bad as they were, I heard several Of∣ficers say, that they were infinitely better than those we had last Year at Landen, which were made up hastily in one Night; so that they could only serve to hinder Horse from riding into our Camp, but not cover our Men either from Cannon or Small-shot; a Man could easily have jump'd over them, Ditch and all: And yet these were call'd, by some, (to magnifie the Victory) Formidable Retrench∣ments.

The 26th. the Regiments of Marton and Fuhnen were sent to reinforce Matthews his Dragons, to cover the Village of Cumtich.

The 27th. the Enemy made a great Forage hard by Leauwe; and because they were to come very near our Camp, and to forage just under the Garrison of Leauwe, they had a strong Detachment of Twelve hundred Horse, and Six Pieces of Cannon, which the Dauphin Commanded himself in Person, to take this Opportunity of viewing the Posts between the two Armies and the Field of Battle where we fought last Year at Landen. The Enemy foraged so near the Garrison of Leauwe, this Day, that they fired Cannon upon them, to oblige them to retire; but Seventy of their Maroders were made Prisoners by a Detachment of ours upon the Left. (When the Soldiers go out of the Camp to gather Roots, Fruits, or Pulse, or, it may be, to Plunder the Boors, this is call'd Maroding.)

Lieutenant-General Dewits, Commanding the Elector of Brandenburg b's Forces employed in Flanders, past the Meuse, much about this time, at Maseick, coming from the Lower
[29]
Rhine, and the Dutchy of Cleves, to joyn our Army with Twenty Squadrons of Horse (of which I shall give a List hereafter) and advanced as far as Diest, to be at hand to reinforce our Army, when the King should have Occasion for it.

The 28th. in the Evening, we heard a firing of Cannon and Small-shot in the French Camp; which we guess'd to be for the Reduction of Gironne, in Catalonia: Of which we were inform'd the next Day. The French were so much the more glad for this Conquest, because that in 1684. the Mareschal de Belfonds suffered a Disgrace before this Place, and was forc'd to raise the Siege, when he had made a Breach in the Place; and that his Forces, in a general Assault, had got into it, but were beaten out again with a great slaughter by the Besieged, that had fortified themselves in the Parade∣place. But the Mareschal de No•ailles got a better Bargain this Bout, and the Besieged did not think fit to stay to Sur∣render till Things should have been brought to this Ex∣tremity.

The 29th. our Parties brought in Two hundred and fifty French Maroders. We had taken so many Prisoners by this time, that the Provosts Guard, and Gaols of the neighbouring Towns, were full of them, though the Ma∣reschal de Luxemburg had them reclaimed as fast as he could: Their Pay is so small, and, for this Twelve-month past, so ill receiv'd, that their Soldiers could not subsist, but by what they could gather in the Country: so that they were forced to tollerate the Soldiers going out of the Camp, to get where∣withal to live. This is the reason that so many fell into the hands of our Parties, and that we took so many Prisoners: And though the French are more given to Deserting than any other Soldiers, yet Deserting was never so much known among them, as 'twas at the Beginning of this Campagne, not only in Flanders, but upon the Rhine, and in Piemont, where they all unanimously complained of their want of Pay; so far, that by this time 'twas computed, that above Five thou∣sand of them had deserted from their Army here, either to our Camp, or to the Garrisons of Liege and Maestricht, since
[30]
the Beginning of the Campagne: Which would be reckoned a great Loss in a Battle.

[ July.] The 1st. of this Month, the French Army left their Camp at St. Tron and Brusten, and marched towards the Jaar and the Meuse, and encamp'd with their Right at Tongres, and the Left at Fies, along the Jaar, which was in their Rear: The Dauphin took his Quarter at Oerle, upon the same River: They had made great Preparations at Huy, of Bombs, Battering-Pieces, and all other Necessaries for a Siege; which now they had brought to their Camp, and gave out, That they designed to Bombard Liege and Maestricht: And some were not content with this, but would have a Formal Siege to one of these Places. But though the French had heavy Cannon and Mortar-pieces brought to their Camp, yet they had Bridges laid along the Jaar, to pass that River: Which shews, That they were more afraid of being attack'd by us, than of having any real Design to fall upon us.

We had above Forty Battalions in the Lines of Liege, and a good Garrison in Maestricht▪ and our own Army consisted now of Ninety Battalions, after the arrival of the Two Re∣giments of Wolfembuttel to our Camp: And if the French had not been cover'd by so many Rivers, which we must have pass'd to come at them, they had run a great risque of having been attack'd on all sides by our Army, and the Liege Forces; but the Nature of the Country gave Opportunity to the French of advancing so near to Maestricht, having Rivers on all sides between them and us, and between them and the Forces encamped in the Lines of Liege: And besides, there was a necessity of suffering the Enemy to consume the Forage about Liege, for Reasons that we shall mention here∣after. However, the French made a great Noise of their Foraging under the Cannon of Maestricht.

The 4th. the two Dominican Fryers, and the Irish Priest, that had been taken up in our Army for Spyes, were set at Liberty: The two first were found Guilty by the Court-Marshal, and Sentenc'd to Die: After which Judgment of the Court, they were removed from the King's Quarters to
[31]
the Provost's, and laid in Irons: But the King Pardon'd them, out of his pure Mercy, (for the Elector of Bavaria would have had them Hang'd,) and sent them to the Arch∣bishop of Malines, to have that Town for a Prison, during the War. But the Irish Priest alledg'd, That he was going to his own Countrey; That he took only the Opportunity of the two Fryers Company to come to our Camp, and so to go for Ireland. Which appearing to be Truth, he was Ac∣quitted, and set this Day at Liberty.

The 7th. Lieutenant-General Dewits, that Commanded the Brandenburgh Forces that we left at Diest, march'd to joyn the Elector of Bavaria, at the Camp of Neer-Ische.

The 10th. the King review'd My Lord of Essex and Bri∣gadier Wynne's Dragons; the latter wanted Two Troops that had been left in England, and his Horses very much fatigu'd in twice crossing the Sea the last Winter, and their continual Motion thorough Ireland and England, to come over to this Countrey. My Lord of Essex's appear'd in very good Condition and Order. The same Day, Two Irish Officers left the French Army, and came over to us; one of them had been in the late Queen's Regiment, and the other in Colonel Talbot's, both of them in Savoy. And Prince Vademont, that had come Post from Italy, to make the Campagne in Flanders, came to Salute the King at his Arrival. His Majesty receiv'd him with a great deal of Joy, and with the greatest Demonstration of Friendship. He is a very Wise General, and has been with the King in all his Campagnes (except the last, that he was in Italy) both in the former and this present War, and is very zealous and af∣fectionate for His Majesty's Interest. Orders were given, this Day, to be ready to March.

The 11th. One of our Parties came to the Camp with a Colonel, Lieutenant-Colonel, Major, and two Captains, and several Soldiers, which they had taken in the Passage-Barge between Namurr and Huy: The Officers were treated very civilly in our Camp, especially the Colonel, who had the liberty of his Sword, and to ride with the Army in the
[32]
following March, to have a full View of it: With which he was very much pleas'd.

The 12th. the Battalions we had posted upon the Left, near the Abbey of Linther, left that Place to come up to the Army, to be in a readiness to March: And the Seven Bat∣talions under the Command of Brigadier Erle, encamp'd upon the Right, upon the Ground that remain'd between it and the Village of Roosebeek, which cover'd the King's Quarter. Some Squadrons of Horse had encamp'd here at the beginning; but upon the making of the Retrench∣ments, they were sent back to the Village, for their more convenient Subsistence. This same Day, Major-General la Forrest was sent with a great Detachment of Horse, to observe the Enemy; and Orders were given to load all the heavy Baggage, and to march that Night without any precedent Beat of Drum, but to take our Motions from the Right.

Accordingly, the 13th. by One of the Clock in the Morn∣ing, the Army began to March upon several Columns. The First consisted of the Brigade of Guards, and the Seven Regiments that had been detached under Brigadier Erle: This Column was led by the Duke of Wirtemberg, and Count Nassau, and passed the Geet between Tilmont and Judoigne. The Two Lines had the General Officers upon their respective Divisions, and the First march'd thorough Tilmont, by the Gate of Louvain, out of the Gate of Judoigne. The Second march'd thorough the Town, by the Gate that leads to Leauwe, and went out by the Gate of St. Tron. The Artillery and Baggage follow'd the Column led by the Duke of Wirtemberg. Very early in the Morning we were got on the other side of the Town, into the Plain; which made room enough to subdivide the Two Lines into Six Columns, for a more speedy and convenient March. The Elector of Bavaria march'd at the same time from his Camp at Neer-Ische, to joyn us this Day; and all the Cavalry had the same Orders. We made a long March between the two Geets, and by the Town of Judoigne, towards the Mehaigne: And though we owe all the following Advantages of the Cam∣pagne
[33]
to this Camp, and that we made no Secret of our March, (for, as we said just now, Orders had been given two Days before, to be ready to March,) yet the French did not think it convenient to hazard a Pattle, to dispute this Camp; which, it may be, was the King's Design, by making no Secret of his March.

We made a Halt about Judoigne, to stay for the Ele∣ctor's Forces, which were to pass the Geet here; and about the Evening, the Right of our Army got to the Mahaigne. The Quarter-Masters had remain'd in this March with the Army, because the Ground we were going to, could have been disputed by the Enemy; and so we mark'd our Lines, after we were come up to our Ground. The King's Quarter was mark'd, in the Order of the March, at Bon∣male; and the Elector's, at Tav•ers, upon the Mahaigne. But the King took his Quarter, upon our coming to this Ground, at Mount St. Andre; and the Elector, at first, had his at Ramelies. Our Right was at Harlue and Taviers, upon the Mehaigne; and the Lest stretched out beyond the Villages of Marilles and Molembais, which we left in our Rear. The Line made a small kind of an Elbow by the Village of Henieux Heddin, which we had here in our Front; the Right of this Camp was a Plain, and the Left went into narrow and close Grounds. All the Cavalry joyn'd us here.

The Brigades of Rantzaw and Dedem were interlin'd in the Right Wing of Horse, under the Command of Major-General Fagel; and the Brigades of Collier and Offarrel in the Left, under the Command of Major-General Ramsay.

And because this is the First Camp where all our Army got together, and where we form'd our Line of Battle, 'tis here that I shall insert the List of our Army: I have had an Authenick List of it, which is as follows. But the Reader is to observe, That I assign no Post upon the Line either to the King, to the Elector of Bavaria, the Duke of Holstein; or the Prince de Vaudemont, General of the King of Spain's
[34]
Army in Flanders: Because being Generals in Chief, they have none. I was guilty, the last Year, of this Mistake.

[*Note, That the Regiments to which I give Two Names, with Olim before the Second, that the Second is the Name the Regiment had last Year.]

[35]
The List of the Confederate ARMY in Flanders, under the Command of His Majesty of Great-Britain, and the Elector of Bavaria.

RIGHT WING.
 	 	 	 	First Line.
 	Lieuten. Generals,	Major-Generals,	Brigad.	Regim.	Squad.
 	 	 	 	Spanish Horse.
DUKE of HOLSTEIN, General of the Spanish Horse.	Lieutenant-Ge∣neral, Du Puy.	 	The Spa∣niards have none: Nei∣ther have I seen the List of their Ge∣nerals de Bat∣tuille, which answer to our Major-Generals.	Valençar Dragons	1
Elector's Life-guards	2
Prince Vaude∣mont and the Duke of Hol∣stein	1 Guards. 1
De Bay	1
Marquis d'Avese	1
Hartman	1
Count d'Arco, Lieutenant-General of the Bavarians.	 	Bavarian Foot.	Battal.
Elector's Guard	2
Count Riviera	1
Bavarian Horse.	Squad.
Arco Dragons	3
Elector of Cologn's Guards	1
Arco Cuirassiers	5
Lieutenant-General, Dewits.	Brandenburgh Horse.	Squad.
Horse-Granadiers	1
Grand Mousquetaires	1
Life-Regiment	3
Du Hammel	1
Electoral Prince	3
Gensd'arms	1
 	 	 	 	Squadrons	26
Battalions	3
[36]

RIGHT WING.
 	 	 	Second Line.
Lieuten. Generals,	Major-Generals,	Brigad.	Regim.	Squad.
MARQUIS de BEDMAR, Master de Camp, General of the Spanish Foot	 	 	Steenhuys Dragons	1
Risbourg Dragons	1
Moncada 1 Troop	 
Ribeaucourt	1
Penalosa	1
Vintimiglia	1
Borja	1
Couriers	1
Bavarian Foot.	Bat.
Count Riviera	1
Horthausen	1
Bavarian Horse.	Squad.
Monasterol Dragons	3
Weickel Cuirassiers	5
Major-General, Sonsfeldt.	Brandenburgh Horse.	Squad.
Dorfling	3
Du Hammel	2
Letwits	2
Fleming.	3
 	 	Squadrons	25
Battalions	2
[37]

RIGHT WING.
 	 	 	First Line.
Lieuten. Generals,	Major-Generals,	Brigad.	Regim.	Battal.
 	 	 	Brigade of Foot interlined, Commanded by Major-General Fagel.
 	Fagel.	Rantzouw	Slangenbourg	1
Rantzouw	1
St. Amand	1
Bernstorf Zell	1
Lochman Suisse	1
Arents	1
Sparre	1
Fagel	1
 	 	 	8
 	 	Dutch Horse in the Right Wing.
Nassau Weilbourg.	Pyper.	Mont pouillon	2
Wirtemberg	2
Vrichapel	2
Erback	2
Hubert	2
Ryswick	Warfusé	2
Wolfembuttel	2
Hesse d'Armstadt	2
Ostfrise	1
Ryswick	2
 	 	Squadrons	19
Battalions	8
 	 	Spanish, Bavarian, and Brandenburgh Squad.	26
Bavarian Foot	3
 	 	 	In all, Squadrons	45
Battalions	11
[38]

RIGHT WING.
 	 	 	Second Line.
Lieuten. Generals,	Major-Generals,	Brigad.	Regim.	Bat.
 	 	 	Brigade of Foot interlined in the Right Wing, un∣der the Command of Major-General Fagel.
 	 	Dedem.	Noyelles	1
Oxensterne	1
Lewenhaupt, Olim• Ko∣ningsmark	1
Buldenbrook, Olim Di∣senhausen	1
Marquett	1
St. Paul	1
Dedem	1
 	 	7
 	Dutch Horse in the Right Wing.
Montigny.	Ittersum	2
Voght	2
Saxen Meiming	2
Saxen	2
Hesse Hombourg	1
Montigny	2
 	 	 	Squadrons	11
Battalions	7
 	 	 	Spanish, Bavarian, and Brandenburgh Horse	25
Bavarian Foot	2
 	 	 	Squadrons upon this Line	36
Battalions	9
[39]

BODY of FOOT.
 	 	 	 	First Line.
 	Lieuten. Generals,	Major-Generals,	Brigad.	Regim.	Battal.
DUKE of WIRTEMBERG, General.	Count Nassau.	Churchill.	Brigade of Guards	English Guards, 1st. Reg.	1
English Guards, 2d. Reg.	1
Dutch Guards	1
Scots Guards	1
Mirmont.	Erle	Royal, or Lord G. Hamilton	1
Selwin	1
Churchill	1
Trelauney	1
Fuziliers, or Fitz-Patrick	1
Brewer	1
Erle	1
 	Ellemberg.	Alfeldt	Meloniere	1
Belcastel	1
Brandenburgh	1
Nassau	1
Prince George	1
Prince Friderick	1
Danish Guards	1
 	Anhalt	Tettau	1
Salisch	1
Luc	1
Tzcharner Suisse	1
Melune Suisse	1
Anhalt	1
Wymbergen	1
Tettau.	L'Ecluse.	Heukelom	Torsay	1
Bulow	1
Bielke	1
Wolfembuttel Guards	1
Holstein Beck	1
Heukelom	1
Ringrave	1
Holstein Ploen	1
 	 	 	 	Battalions	33
[40]

BODY of FOOT.
 	 	 	Second Line.
Lieuten. Generals,	Major-Generals,	Brigad.	Regim.	Battal.
 	 	The other half of the Brigade of Guards	English Guards, 1st. Reg.	1
Dutch Guards	1
Scots Guards	1
Bellasis.	Stuart	Granville, Olim Bathe	1
Tidcomb	1
Lesley	1
Castleton	1
Lauder	1
St. George	1
Meloniere.	Haxhausen	Marton, Olim Cambon	1
Aver	1
Funon	1
Jutland	1
Prince Christian	1
Queen of Denmark	1
Salisch▪	Holstein Norbourg	Zobel	1
Gober	1
Capol Suisse	1
Schrattenback, Olim Aylua	1
Cinquilles	1
Carle	1
Holstein Norbourg	1
Count de Noyelles.	Bernsdorf	L'Ecluse	1
Dumont	1
Heyden	1
Hockeren	1
Hering	1
Bernsdorf	1
Hanouer Guards	1
Bickenfeldt	1
 	 	 	Battalions	30
[41]

Continuation of the Left Wing.
Earl of Athlone, General.
First Line.
Lieutenant-General, Auverquerque.
Major-Generals.
Hubert.
Tilly.
Ramsay
La Forrest.
Colchester.
Scarborough.
Brig.	Regim.	Battal.
Iselstein	Nassau Sarbruck	2
Prince Phiilpe	2
Saxengotha	2
Boisdair'd	2
Tilly	2
Dompre	Dompre	2
Saxe Heylburg	2
Grisper	2
Nassaw Weilburg	4
Athlone	2
Brigade of Foot interlined, Commanded by Major-Ge∣neral Ramsay.
Brig.	Regim.	Battal.
Collier	Tiffeny	1
Ingoldsby	1
Fred. Hamilton	1
Stanley	1
Collingwood	1
Lloyd	1
 	Battalions	6
Leveson	Leveson	2
Windham	2
Galloway	3
Wood	2
Lumley	Langston	2
Coy	2
Schomberg or Linster	2
Lumley or the Qu.	3
L'Etang	Portland	2
Auverquerque Li. G.	1
Colchester now E. of Rivers Life-G.	1
Ormonds Life-Gua.	1
Scarborough Life-G.	1
Horse Granadiers	1
 	Squadrons	47
[42]

Continuation of the Left Wing.
Second Line.
Lieutenant-General, Lord Portland.
Major-Generals.
Warfuse.
Ittersum.
Zeugleustein.
D. of Ormond.
Brigad.	Regim.	Battal.
Choviere	Nassau Friseland	3
Lippe Holland	2
Turk	2
Monflin	2
Choviere	2
Staine	2
Roc	Arco	1
Bernikow	2
Saxen	2
Oht	2
Flodort	2
Lippe Zell	Lippe Zell	2
Zeulen	2
Goedon	2
Heyden	2
Opdam	2
Brigad.	Regim.	Battal.
Second Brigade of Foot inter∣lined, Commanded by Major General Ramsay.
Offarrel	Offarrel	1
Buchan	1
Mackay	1
Maitland olim Leven	1
Ferguson	1
Graham	1
 	Battalions	6
Schack	Schack	2
Scravenmor	2
Vittinghoff	2
Zeulestein	2
Boncourt	Boncourt	2
Wirtemberg	2
Zeestadt	2
La Forrest	2
 	Squadrons	48
 	Battalions	6
[43]

Body of Reserve, consisting of Dragoons.
Major-General Eppinger.
Dutch Dragoons.	English Dragoons.
Brigadiers.	 	Squad.	Brigadiers.	 	Squad.
 	Holstein Ploen	4	Wynne	Eppinger	5
Berenburg	4	Essex	4
Mathar	4	Wynne	3
 	Schlipenback	4	Cunningham	4
Schuglenburg	3	Mathews	Fairfax	4
Willers	3	Livingston	4
Dopf	4	Mathews	4
 	Squadrons	26	 	Squadrons	28
You must observe that at first coming to the Camp of Mount St. André, all the Dragoons incamped upon the Left, where the Left is the Post of Honour: 'Tis for this Reason that the English Dragoons in this List fall after the Dutch. Our Artil∣lery consisted of Sixty pieces of Cannon and six Mortars, and four Companies of Gunners and Matrosses, and one of Miners, each of one hundred men. The Artillery was commanded by Colonel Goor, Lieutenant-Colonel Brown, and Major Slondt; and the four Companies of Gunners and Matrosses which carry Fire-Armes, were commanded by the Captains, Watson, Cock, Vanderstam and Lesley. The Dutch Artillery consisted of the same strength both in respect of Cannon and Men.

It appears by this List of our Line of Battle at Mount St. André, that our Army consisted in the Right and Left Wing, of 176 Squadrons of Horse, which at 150 Horse each Squa∣dron at our first coming into the Field, makes 26400 Horse; the Reserve consisted of 54 Squadrons of Dragoons, 100 each Squadron, which is our complement, which makes 5400
[44]
Dragoons; by which the total of our Horse and Dragoons amounted to 31800 Men, all very well Mounted and Armed; but of the Dragoons especially I may say, That such a Body, either for Number or the good Order they were in, has hardly ever been in the Field. Our Infantry consisted of 63 Batta∣lions in the body of Foot, 20 interlined in the Right Wing of Horse, and 12 in the Left, which in all makes 95 Battalions, which at 600 each Battalion at first coming into the Field, a∣mounts to 51000 Foot and 31800 Horse, which makes the total summe of our Army at Mount St. André to be 88800 Men, and about 7000 which Count Thian had incamped un∣der his command near Ghendt, of which we have given an account before, which being added to the former summe, amounts to 95800 Men. This is all we had now in the Field. 'Tis true that we had a great many Forces in Liege, of which I shall give an account to the Reader hereafter. But that Town being then our Frontier, it required an Army for a Garison; and the condition of affairs in regard of that City did then require our special care for its safety; so that what Forces we had in Liege at that time were useless as to the act∣ing offensively; whilst the Enemy were between us and the Meuse, with as good an Army in the Field as ours, except what it had suffered by deserters; for by our computation of the French Forces above, it appears that they had here and in Flanders 91320 Men, which was but 4480 Men less than we had in the Field in both these places, which in such a number is no great odds: I put it therefore to the Judgment of Im∣partial Men, whether the French were not in a better condi∣tion to act defensively against us this year, than we to have acted defensively against them in the former Campaigns.

We dispos'd our Field-Pieces this March to mount to St. André upon the head of the Several Brigades of Foot, each Brigade had Five Field-Pieces, with Stores and Gunners pro∣portionably. The Day following, Count Alefeldt was De∣tach'd with his Brigade to the Village of Ramelies, which the Elector of Bavaria left to take his Quarter at Taviers upon the Mahaigne, and this Post was committed to the Charge of Major General Ellenberg. We made a Retrenchment about
[45]
Ramelies, and placed a great many pieces of Canon upon the height of this Village which commanded the Plain that leads to Huy. The same day we rectified our Camp, which had been mark'd in haste the day before to make the Line more regular, and filled up the Interval that had been left by Alefeldt's Bri∣gade. The French being advised of our March towards the Mehaigne, left this day their Camp between Tongres and Fies, and marched near to Huy, after they had passed the Jaar upon several Bridges; they imcamped with their Right between the Villages of Vignamont and Walef towards the Jaar, and their Left at Fenmale upon the Mehaigne. The Dauphin took his Quar∣ter at Vignamont, within Two English Miles of Huy; and the French, which before made a shew of having some design upon Liege or Maestricht, now did not think themselves secure enough in the Camp of Vignamont, though strong by Situation between the Meuse, the Jaar, and Mehaigne, but immediately upon their coming to this Camp they fortified it where it was open, between the Jaar and the Mehaigne, with a very good Re∣trenchment, which they made as strong as art and leasure could do it. The Right of our own Camp, upon the Mehaigne, was within Two Leagues and a half of Namur, and within Four English Miles of the Meuse: for which reason the French kept their Communications with Namur, from whence they had their Provisions by Land on the other side of the River, which before they had by Water; and the Marquiss d' Harcourt, which before lay incamped between the Paijs de Liege and that of Luxemburg, was ordered to come and Post himself on the other side of the Meuse near Huy, to cover the French Convoys, which otherwise would have been much exposed to the Excur∣sion of the Garrison of Liege, which has an equal advantage on both sides of the River: And because the French were now every much streightned in their Camp, that they had already forraged all about Liege and Maestricht, and that there remained but little Ground on this side of the River which they could forrage se∣curely on; the Dauphin, to provide for the subsistance of his Army as long as he could, ordered all the heavy Baggage of the Army to march by Huy to the other side of the Meuse. This was the great Advantage of our Camp at Mount St. André,
[46]
That the French, which before ravaged all the Countrey be∣tween Liege and Maestricht, were now forced to Retrench them∣selves under the Walls of their own Garrison of Huy; and that it put all the Countrey on this side of the Sambre under our Command, so far, that the French, though Masters both of Namur and Charleroy, yet could not hinder us from incamping in the Plains of Fleury, and were themselves forced to pass and re-pass the Sambre, which is a great way about, to follow us in∣to Flanders. And though our Advantages were so great by this Camp, yet we could not take it up sooner, because the French might then have subsisted about Liege and Huy longer than we could have done upon the Mehaigne; which would have exposed Liege too much to the French Power, upon our March to the Scheld.

The 16th. Stuarts Brigade was detached out of the Line to incamp at the Cense, or Farm of Franquenies, near the Abbey of Bonef upon the Mehaigne, where they intrenched themselves, and the Guard of this Post was committed to the charge of Count Nassau, Lieutenant General. This Village, with that of Ramelies on the other side, Commanded the Plain before our Right Wing, (where we incamped along the Mehaigne in the Campagne of 1692. where the King had his Quarter at Ra∣melies, and our Right by Perwys, and the Left at Brancon upon the Mehaigne: The French were then besieging the Castle of Namur,) the rest of our Camp was covered in the Front by the Lesser, and in the Rear by the Greater Geet: The River in the Front was a great way from the Line, above half of a League, but a little Brook covered it nearer that went from the Village of Offus and fell into the Lesser Geet at Jauche. This was the Strength and Situation of our Camp at Mount St. André, the Posts that covered, and the Advantages we got by it.

Upon our coming to this Camp, and the French to Vignamont, the King ordered the Forces that were incamped within the Lines of Liege, to march out, and form a Camp by the Citadel, consisting of Dutch, Brandenbourg, and Liege Forces, Com∣manded by Prince Circlaes of Tilly, and the Major-General Heyden, and Cohorne. This was a very convenient Camp to molest the Enemy in their Forrage towards Liege; and the
[47]
French to be even with us, Commanded a small Body of Horfe and Dragoons, Commanded by Colonel Vaillat, to incamp un∣der the Walls of Namur to molest our Forragers between the Mehaigne and the Meuse, who often went very near Namur: The French sent besides this Detachment, a Man of a Company Commanded by the Officers, that had best knowledge of the Countrey, to go out in Parties; in which they had pretty good success, particularly between the Mehaigne and the Meuse, where we lost several Horses, and they took generally some Prisoners. But if these were inconvenient to us from Namur, our Camp near Liege was equally inconvenient to the Enemy on that side from whom they took a great many Horses and Pri∣soners; but few Deserters came to us from this Camp, though they deserted before in Multitudes, because they were so closely intrenched between Rivers that it was difficult for them, who had a mind, to get away.

The 17th. the King rid out very early, with a strong De∣tachment of 4000 Horse, along the Mehaigne, towards the Enemies Camp, and returned very late that Evening: The day following we had a general Forrage on the other side the Mehaign. Several of the Enemies Squadrons appeared in sight of our Forragers; for which reason we fired three Pieces of Cannon from our Camp, the Signal to call them in. The French did forrage the same day on their side, and these Squadrons were of the Detachment to Cover the Forragers, who were no less surprised to see some of our Squadrons posted near them for the same reason; however there was no Action on either Side, though such Accidents falling out have sometimes brought two Armies to an ingagement, as it happened in 1689 at Walcourt, between Prince Waldeck and the Mareschal de Humieres. Our Foragers nevertheless made a shift not to come into the Camp empty, but we lost some Horses that tarried too long after the Signal given to come off, at which time the Detachment that cover'd the Foragers were commanded back to the Camp. Colonel Mathews lost 8 Horses out of his Regiment, and 3 of his Men were wounded.

The 22th all the Dragoons removed from the Left to the Rear of the Right by Hottemont: What remained of the
[48]
English and Dutch Artillery after the Field-pieces had been di∣stributed into the several Brigades of Foot, and that we had planted some others at the Village of Ramelies, came to be posted here the day before from the ground between Mount St. André and Bonmale, where it had incamped at our first coming here. And the 24th the Duke of St. Albans and Co∣lonel Lutterel came to the Camp from England; the first to serve as a Voluntier, and the second to go to Venice and com∣mand the Irish Forces in the Service of that Republick, with a Commission of Major-General. This day we had another general Forage towards Wavre, where the Lord Colchester, now Earl of Rivers, lost some Horses out of his Troop of Guards. The Parties not only from Namur, but from Mons and Charleroy, were very frequent, and came often to the very Rear of our Camp; so that upon a Forage, 'twas very hard to prevent the losing several of our Horses, either by negligent Men who did not take care to keep within the out∣guards; or others, who for choice of Forage would venture beyond them.

The 26th we surrounded a party of the Enemies in a Wood, just by the Rear of our Left, where they had been decoy'd by a Boor, who gave notice of it to my Lord of Athlone. This was a voluntary Party of dismounted Troopers that had a great mind to ride some of our Horses, and to mount them∣selves at our own cost; they got a Partisan with them, who when they came near to our Camp inquir'd whereabouts our Horses grazed; the Boor told them, that they were every day just by the Wood, and that if they would lie there in ambuscade that night they would not fail of Horses the next morning: They took his advice, and the Boor came immedi∣ately to advertise my Lord of Athlone of it, who commanded a Detachment of Dragoons and of the two Brigades of Foot interlined in the Left to surround the Wood, and to give no quarter; so that they kill'd 20 of them up and down, and the Partisan among the rest; but at last they gave quarter to 17. Much about the same time one of our Parties, composed of Soldiers of Hukelom and Carles Regiments, brought in the Lieutenant-Colonel of the Dauphins Regiment, and several
[49]
other Prisoners, which they took between Huy and Namur. And though 'tis none of my business to speak of the actions of Parties and Partisans, which have no more to do in the main business of an Army, than Privateers have in that of a Fleet, the one being upon Land what the others are at Sea, yet I can∣not omit to speak of a considerable adventure of one of our Parties, which ventured to pass the Meuse though not 30 Men, and got about 50 Troopers in a defile, where they took all their Horses, and made every one of them Prisoners, and re∣pass'd the Meuse with their Booty, which they brought safe∣ly off.

The 21th Count Thian had a quiet Camp in the Neighbour∣hood of Ghendt, where he seemed posted only to make head against the Marquis De la Valette near Courtray, yet he would not remain idle there, but about this time he made a Detach∣ment of 300 Spanish Horse out of his Camp, under the com∣mand of the Lieutenant-Colonel of the Prince of Chinays Re∣giment, who in their way by Aeth took a Reinforcement of 700 Foot out of that Garison, and the next day they were joyn'd with about 3 or 400 more of the same Garison: These Forces attack'd the French Line about St. Ghilain, and forced several of their Redoubts upon the Haine, where they made 50 Prisoners; they pass'd the River after this, and plundered the Town of St. Ghilain, where there was a small Garison which abandon'd it upon their approach, and retreated to Mons; they detach'd several Parties in the Countrey round about for Hostages, and made a very great booty of Horses and Cattle which they brought to Aeth.

The 27th the three Battalions of Guards in the Second Line, had Orders to incamp upon the Kings Quarter, a great deal of baggage of the Kings Horse, and several, both Mules and Horses were on the other side of the little River which went under the Kings Quarter; and the King had information of the designs of some of the French Partisans to come and endeavour to steal away what lay on the other side of this River, where it was expos'd to such attempts; and besides the Kings Quar∣ter was removed from the Line of the Army, for which reason these three Battalions of Guards, and the Duke of Holsteins
[50]
Dragoons incamped here by the Kings Quarter, the Guards on the other, and the Dragoons on this side of the Geet.

The 28th we had another general Forage, under a good escort of 20 Squadrons of Horse commanded by Count Tilly, Major-General, and a good Detachment of Foot commanded by Brigadier Collier. Some Horses were lost of Brigadier Mathews his Dragoons, and two of his Men were kill'd by the French Parties that lay in ambuscade for a like occasion.

The 31th the King took a review of the 20 Brandenburgh Squadrons of Horse that (as we said above) had joyn'd the Elector of Bavaria at his Camp of Neer Isthe, being com∣manded by Lieutenant-General D' Witz and Major-General Sonsfeldt•; the Elector of Bavaria was present, and the King was very well pleased with the order they were in. The grand Musquetiers made a very fine shew, being all French Gentlemen Refugies, very well Cloath'd with Scarlet Coats and Silver Lace, and as well Mounted; they behaved them∣selves very well the beginning of this War at the Siege of Bonne, and have been no less serviceable this Campaign in that of Huy.

[ August.] The 1st of August the King reviewed four Regiments of Saxon Horse that had come up to the Camp the Saturday be∣fore: They are included in the Line of Battle which we have incerted above. Intervals had been left for them in several Brigades at our coming to this Camp, which they fill'd up at their arrival; so that their coming did not alter the Line of Battle above specified; they are only called Saxon Regiments in the List, but their Names were Rebauld, Bernickow and Penhausen, the fourth I have forgot. The States have hired them for their service from the Elector of Saxony; and not∣withstanding that they had made a long march to come so soon to the Camp from their Country, yet they appeared in good order.

The 5th all the heavy Baggage of the Army was command∣ed away towards Louvain under the Escorte of Brigadier Wynnes Regiment of Dragoons, which was sent to garison in Ghendt, because their Horses were out of order for reasons we
[51]
have before alledged. A Man out of a Company was likewise detach'd for the security of the Baggage, under the command of a Captain, Lieutenant and Ensign, out of each Brigade, and the whole was commanded by Colonel, Lieutenant-Colonel, and Major.

By this time Forage began to be very scarce in both Armies, which were very numerous, and yet had now been above two Months in and about the Pajis de Liege. The French had been in it from the very beginning of the Campaign, and now had liberty of Forage but between the Meuse and the Jaar, for that part of the Principality of Liege which lies on the other side of the Meuse call'd the Condros, affords but little Forage; 'tis a Woody Country, and part of the Forest d' Ardenne abounds in Coal-pits, which makes firing very cheap about this Country. The French for want of Forage on this side the Meuse were forced to send their Horses to feed on the other, having besides the passage at Huy several Bridges upon the Meuse for that purpose. I saw a Letter about this time from a Gentleman in the French Army to his Friend, da∣ted from this Camp of Vignamont, wherein he complained for want of Forage, and that they wish'd very much for our de∣camping, that they might have the liberty of going to a more plentiful Camp. As we have given a hint of it before, there was a reason to bring the Army to this want of Forage on both sides in this Country, because the King design'd to bring his Army into Flanders to make room for the undertaking that has closed up this Campaign. Liege was our Frontier Town, which required an Army for its Garison, and the French being Masters of Huy, they could not only incommode Liege very much, but march and subsist with their Army as far as Mae∣stricht, as we have seen this Campaign; so that above all things, 'twas necessary to drive the French out of Huy, and establish our Frontier there: But if we had march'd towards Flanders without consuming first the Forage all over this Country, and without obliging the French themselves to help us in it; upon our removal from this Camp, and our march towards the Scheld, they might have fallen upon Liege, and our great Towns in Brabant, which would have been as good for them
[52]
as any Expedition we could have made in Flanders, and which I believe they would have compass•d so much the sooner, since these places here are weak, and their Frontier Garisons in Flanders very strong.

The 5th, 240 Suisse Deserters were sent from Maestricht to the Camp to recruit the Suisse Regiments we had in our Army.

The 6th an Order from the King was published at the head of every Regiment, to forbid Foraging without order, to go on Maroding, or to molest Victuallers, or any persons that came to the Camp with Provisions, upon pain of death. For what most destroys and ruines a Country are these interloping Foragers and Maroders, who not only augment the scarceness in a Camp by plundering the Country people round about, but often fall into the Enemies hands, whereby we lose our Horses, and our Men are made Prisoners.

The 7th the Army had orders to be ready to march, and the Artillery and Pontons were sent this day as far as Perwys, under the Escorte of the Regiment of Fuknen or green Danes. The French expected our march, for which reason they fired several pieces of Cannon from Huy to call in all their Horses from the other side of the Meuse. We had a report that the French had abandon'd it, and that what we heard was the blowing up of the Works, which appeared afterwards to be a story; though I believe the French had once a design of doing it, because the week before they had sent most of the Provisi∣ons and Stores from thence by water to Namur, but upon bet∣ter thoughts they found the place of such consequence to us, that they resolved to use their power to keep it if possible out of our hands. The French upon the news of our march, which they expected this day, sent several Parties and Detachments out of the Garison of Namur, to observe the Flanks of our Columns upon the march, and take Prisoners or Baggage if they could find any stragling from the Lines: But because we did not march, our Detachments were not yet drawn off from the other side of the Mehaigne, so that several of the French fell into their hands, who were made Prisoners; among the rest, a Captain of Horse of the Regiment of Tournelle. This
[53]
Evening orders were given to march the next day, and though we had a Defile to pass between the Mehaigne and Perwys, where the French might have the opportunity of attacking our Rear-guard the next day; nevertheless we did not use any means to conceal our march from the Enemy; it may be to intice them out of their Retrenchments at Vignamont to fall upon our Rear-guard, and to ingage them to a Battle, for our Rear guard was very well prepared to receive them.

The 8th the Army decamped very early from Mount St. André, and directed its march towards the spring of the Me∣haigne and Gemblours passing by the Defile of Perwys My Lord Portland had the Rear-guard, composed of a good body of Horse, and the Brigade of Stuart and Alseldt of Foot, which had been posted at Franquenies upon the Mehaigne, and some Field-pieces The King kept with the Rear guard till he saw it free from any attempts of the Enemy, where the na∣ture of the Country did afford them an occasion to have fallen upon it. We made a long march this day, and the weather being warm made several Soldiers saint under their Armes. The King took his Quarter at the Chateau of Sombref, our Right went towards Fleury at St. Amand, from whence it turned back almost in a right Angle to Marbais, where the Elector of Bavaria had his Quarter, and our Left went to∣wards Gemblours as far as the Cense or Farm of Bretinchamp. The Kings Quarter being in the Front of the Army, was co∣vered by all the English and Dutch Dragoons, who incamped before it upon a Line. The Enemy being sensible that they could not hinder us from this Camp, and expecting our march to this place, had ordered the small body of Horse and Dra∣goons commanded by Colonel Vaillac from Namur, to march to Charleroy, both to cover that place, and to incommode our Foragers. We halted here the next day; we had made a long march, and the Rear-guard could not come up till two or three of the Clock in the Morning, and besides it was necessary to see what the French would do upon this march; whether they would go back to Liege, and endeavour to fall upon it, (though the want of Forage could not allow them to subsist there any longer) or whether they would follow us, and march
[54]
upon the Sambre: For if they had been obstinate, to have kept on this side of the River, then the Plain of Fleury was a very convenient place to try the Issue of another Battle, and the odds were not so great between the two Armies, but that the French (if they depend so much on their boasted Bravery) might ve∣ry well have ventured it. The Enemy out-did us in Foot by Two Battalions, as it appears by the List of their Line of Battle and ours, but we out-numbered them in Horse and Dragoons; however it appeared by the Enemies behaviour at this time, that they depend more upon the Number than the Bravery and Valour of their Soldiers.

The French had so many reports of our marching the day before, in which they were deceived, that though we made no secret of this days march, yet they were not certain of it till about Noon; their Right Wing of Horse was then gone to forrage: The Dauphin caused several Pieces of Cannon to be fired to call them in; the Resolution was taken to follow us, and the Drums immediately beat the General to give notice of mar∣ching. About Four in the Afternoon the Dauphin began to move with the Right Wing of Horse and Body of Foot, and passed the Mehaigne at Falay, directing their March up along the Meuse towards Namur. The Right Wing of Horse, Com∣manded by the Mareschal de Villeroy, being returned from their Forrage, followed the Dauphin about Eight that Evening, and so they marched all Night and the next day, that they came a∣bout the Evening between Spy and Masey, and the Dauphin took his Quarter at the Chateau de Soye upon the Sambre; but in leaving the Camp of Vignamont, the French provided for the safety of Huy, and left a Battalion to reinforce the Garrison. When they were come up to this Camp, we could discover part of their Left, but the little River that runs from Gemblours into the Sambre co∣vered them, and remained between us: However though we were so near one another, and that the Plains of Fleury offered a very convenient field of battle, yet the French were unwilling to hazard it, but rather resolved to make a Retreat, and pass the Sambre; which they began that very Night: The Infantry of the Kings House led the way, and the next day the whole Army, with the Right Wing of Horse, Commanded by the Mareschal de
[55]
Villeroy, followed, and incamped at Ausart l' Estrang, about a League and a half from Charleroy, between it and Namur; but their Troops were so fatigued with the March, which con∣tinued night and day, that the Colours of their Battalions were almost left bare, and Sixty Men made a good Battalion upon the March, the rest being wearie stragled behind. The Mareschal de Villeroy was detached from this place with a Body of Horse and Dragoons towards the Scheld, (where the Ene∣mies were informed we did design to march with all speed) and took his March by Maubeuge, where he re-passed the Sambre, and passed the Scheld the next day at Conde, making all diligence to get to Tournay.

The Enemy upon our halt at Sombref the 9th. fired several Pieces of Cannon at Charleroy; I suppose for Signals of our halt; but the King being informed that the French would pass the Sambre rather than venture the Issue of a Battle in the Plains of Fleury, and that they did actually begin to pass it that very Night, gave Orders for the Army to march the next day. Ac∣cordingly the Army left the Camp of Sombref the day following, and marched by Mellé towards Genap and Nivelle; about noon we passed the Dyle at the Village and Chateau of Promel, about Four in the Afternoon our Right was got to Arkennes upon the Senne, that runs by Nivelle and Nostredame de Halte to Brusselles. We incamped here this Night; our Line went from Senne al∣most to the Dyle, our Right at Arkennes, the Elector of Bavaria's Quarter; and our Left at Vaillantpont, not far from Promel, where we had passed the Dyle; the King took his Quarter in the Town of Nivelle. This is a neat little Town; it lies in a Bot∣tom, and so cannot be made strong, however it has ancient Walls and Roundels about it, and is more particularly famous for the Abbey of Secular Chanonesses, which are all to be Wo∣men of the first Quality of the Countrey; they take no Vows, but may marry if they please, and leave their places. In the Choice they have Robes and Furrs like Secular Canons, and the Head-dress like Nuns; but otherwise, when they are out of the Church they dress themselves like other Ladies. The design of the Foundation was for Women of the best Quality, that had no considerable Fortunes, to live here Honourably, without in∣cumbring
[56]
the small Estate of the Family. The Abbess of this Collegiate Church is Lady of the Town; and the Army, on both sides, have been very favourable to this place, for the sake of the Religious Ladies.

Upon this March to Nivelle, the Colonel of the Dutch Train of Artillery visiting the Ammunition Waggons, found a Stran∣ger in one of them that could give no good account of himself: He had got in by pretending himself to be of the Army, that he was weary, and could not march; by which pretence, and a little Drinking-Money to the Waggoner, he got leave to get up in the Waggon: The Dutch Colonel, that came to visit the Waggons, suspected him, and caused him to be searched, and found a lighted Match about him, and besides he gave so ill an account of himself that he was soon discovered to be a French∣man, and that he was come from the Enemies to endeavour to set fire to our Ammunitions: For which he was sent to the Pro∣voste, where we shall leave him, till we come to give an ac∣count of his Punishment suitable to the Enormity of the At∣tempt.

The 11th. Major-General Fagel was detacht, with the Two Brigades of Foot of Rantzaw and Dedem interlined in the Right Wing of Horse, to go by Lessines to Audenarde, and the Ar∣tillery went with a good Escorte another way to joyn us in the the Plains of Cambron, because the Defiles were too difficult in the two following days March for the Artillery to go along with us; we were got into the Country of Hainault, which is ge∣nerally very close and woody. The same day the Army marcht from Nivelle and passed the Senne over several Bridges above, and at the Village of Arkennes, and so we came to Soignies. We lost upon this March some of our Pontons, or Tin-Boats, and some Baggage taken by the Enemy, which (as 'tis said) perswaded the Men that looked after them to go a more conve∣nient way, pretending themselves to be Dragoons of our Army, and so got them out of the Line of the Baggage; they made the Men Prisoners, and took the Horses from the Pontons and Waggons; they rifled the Baggage and took what they thought good, and left the rest; they blew up holes in the Pontons with powder, and so left them. The Army being now come up by
[57]
several Defiles to Soignies; our Right was at Horrues and Neufville, where the Elector had his Quarter; the Left stret∣ched out a little beyond Court Aubois; and the King had his Quarter at Soignies, an old Town in the Chatelleine of Mons, and within three short Leagues of it. As soon as the French had made themselves Masters of Mons, they Summoned the Burgh-Masters, and Inhabitants, to come and swear Allegiance to the French King, and since are reckoned in the Paijs Conquis. We heard firing of Cannon at Mons this Evening, which (as we had information the next day) was for the Dauphine's Ar∣rival at that place, where the whole Army followed him that very Night. Upon our march from Sombref towards the Scheld, the French made their utmost diligence to prevent any designs we could have upon their Lines, or Towns, in Flanders; for which reason they marched on the 11th from Ausart L' Estrang; (though their Army was already fatigued by their March night and day to get to that side of the Sambre;) they went by Ham Sur Heure, and so repassed the Sambre at Bussiere, which was already a good March: But the Mareschal de Luxemburg find∣ing it necessary to get as far as Mons that very Night, that he may come to the Scheld as soon as we, ordered all the Infantry to fling away their Snap-sacks, and march with nothing but their Arms, and all the Baggage was ordered to stay behind; he caused likewise all the Waggons of the Countrey to be sum∣moned to follow the Army with the Soldiers Snap-sacks, and to take up the wearied Soldiers who could not march, and bring them after to the Camp. The Enemy made a halt at Bussiere, after they had re-passed the Sambre, to refresh themselves; the Prince of Conti, who Commanded the Infantry as first Lieutenant-Ge∣neral, told them, That they had suffered but little for the King's Service that Campaigne, That the King's Service did now re∣quire a quick and a speedy March, and therefore that such who loved His Majesty's Service should shew it, and follow their Colours. He then caused 400 Pistols-worth of Brandy, which had been brought from the neighbouring Towns for that pur∣pose, to be given to the Infantry to drink; and so the Colours were ordered to march on, and all the Foot, that were come up, endeavoured to shew their Zeal for the King's Service by
[58]
marching along with them; but all along Waggons were pro∣vided to take up those who could not march, and Brandy upon every halt. The Enemy came very early, by break of day, near Mons, to which place the Dauphine was got the night before. I cannot say that they incamped here, because all the Soldiers Tents were left behind for a more expeditious march, but here they lay down upon the ground to rest them∣selves.

The 12th the Army marched towards Aeth; we passed the River of Cambron at Lens, and so got into the Plain of Cam∣bron, where we incamped with our Right at Irchonwetz, with∣in half an English mile of Aeth, where the Elector of Bavaria had his Quarters, and the Left at Lens, the Abby of Cambron remained in the Rear of the Left. We had the Town of Chievres before the Right, where the King took his Quarters. This is an old ruined Town, where the Spaniards had once a Garison, but the French upon pretence that it was within the Chatelleine of Tournay, beat them out of it, and no Garison has been in it since There is hardly a finer place in all the Seventeen Provinces for an Army to incamp upon, than the Plains of Cambron, where the strength and scituation equals the beauty and conveniency of the Plain, which reaches from the Village of Irchonwetz to Lens upon the little River that runs by Cambron, about five English Miles in length, with a small rising over against Chievres, from whence we could have a perfect prospect of the Camp from the Right to the Left. Our Right was covered by the Dender and Irchonwetz, which runs through Aeth, where 'tis joyned by the River of Cam∣bron; and our Left and Rear by the River which from Lens went round the Rear by Cambron Abbey, and so to Aeth. Our Front was covered by a Wood and close Defiles which are between this place and Mons. The Artillery which we had sent from Nivelle another way, because of the narrowness of the Defiles we were to march through, came up to us this day. But we could not long injoy the commodiousness of this Camp, the King was hastening his march to the Scheld, and so orders were given to march on the next day.

[59]
The 13th in the Morning the Duke of Wirtemberg was com∣manded with seven Brigades of Horse, one of them under the command of Brigadier Lumley, to pass the Scheld at Audenarde, where he was to joyn the two Brigades of Foot commanded by Major Fagel, detach'd from the Camp at Nivelle, of which we have given an account before. An Express was sent like∣wise to Count Thian to march up from Ghendt, with the body under his command towards Audenarde; and to send the three Terces of Walloon Foot to garison in Bruges, and to leave Bri∣gadier Holles Regiment in Deinse. The same day the Army marched, the first Line passed the River of Irchonwetz above Aeth, the second with the Cannon and Baggage marched through the Town. This Town, as it appears by what we have said before, is scituated at the confluence of two small Rivers, the Dender and that of Cambron, which pass through the Town; it was taken by the French King in 1667, in that irruption he made in Flanders after the death of Philip the Fourth: 'Twas left to the French King by the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, and remain'd in their hands till the Peace of Nime∣guen, when it was given up again to the King of Spain; and as all Spanish Towns are very much improved by coming into French hands, so this place got a signal advantage by it: It was before of a very irregular figure, as appears by the Gates (before the French had it) which are left standing to this day, and its chief Strength consisted in the Morass made by the Den∣der and Cambron River on the one side of it, the other was for∣tified with weak Bastions of Earth-work, commanded by the neighbouring ground. But as soon as the French had it yield∣ed to them by the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle, Mounsieur de Vauban was ordered to use his Skill about it. He new Model'd the Circuit of the place, and brought it almost to the figure of a regular Heptagone; it has one side longer than the rest (up∣on which is the Port of Tournay) which occasions an almost flat Bastion, else all the rest of the Courtines and Works are near equal; the Circuit of the Town and all the Works of it are faced with Free Stone, the Fosse all about the place is for∣tified with Tenailles or Horn-work in it, according to Mon∣sieur de Vaubans Method of Fortification, and faced with Free
[60]
Stone; and the River Dender joyned by the other, passing through the Town, keeps the Fosse always full of Water, which they can stop in the Town by Sluices, or let it out again in Frosty-weather, at which time such a Fosse would other∣wise be dangerous; and because the grouud about the Town, from the Port of Mons to that of Brussels, is high and com∣mands the place, every Bastion has a good Cavalier raised upon it to remedy this inconveniency. The French had made a Horn∣work by the Port of Mons, and another by the Port of Tour∣nay, but as we marched through this place they were pulling it down to make it a double Fosse and covered way between these two places, with Redoubts in the Angles, Saillants, or Points jetting out, which they found more convenient and de∣fensible. The place has now three very stately Gates, that of Mons, that of Tournay, and that of Brussels, done according to Modern Architecture, with an Inscription above each of them in Letters of Gold, in Latin, French and Dutch, upon the several Gates; upon that of Mons 'tis in Latin, importing that the King of France took the place in the Expedition he made in Flanders in 1667, to assert the right of his Queen Mary Theresa, and that he was content to establish the limits of his Empire here, when Fortune promised him the Conquest of all Flanders. All the other States of Christendom are so much under-valued in this piece of Flattery, that it may very well be incerted here for the satisfaction of England in parti∣cular, as I have translated it.

The Inscription upon Mons-Port at Aeth.

LOUIS the XIV. King of France and Navarre, finding nothing that could Resist His Armes, in the Expedition He made for the Legal Pretensions of Mary Theresa His Wife, was content to give Bounds to Him∣self, to a Fortune that promised Him in a short time the Conquest of all Flanders. Thus it is that this Prince, truly Great, has known how to Reconcile two
[61]
Vertues so much opposed to one another, as the Love of Glory, and Moderation; and to let the World see, that in the very height of His Victories, He desired Peace: Being the onely One that could find the Art of Obliging all Europe, even His Enemies, by extending the Bounds of His Empire. And that the Town of Aeth may be an Everlasting Monument of so many Glorious Actions, He has been willing after He has had it Fortified, that it should serve for a Limit, and a Bulwark to his Em∣pire, in the Year 1670.

Within each of the Gates is a very fine Piazza, with the Corps de Garde at one end, and the Officers of the Guards-Room and other Apartments at the other. The Pillars of the Piazza support a very fine Store house built of Free Stone, with a good Frontispiece that over▪looks the Gate, upon the Chemin des rondes, or way that goes round the Rampart; it has an Italian Roof, with Crowns of Flower-de-luces or Dolphins gilt upon it; all the Sentry-boxes are built very pretty with Free Stone, with like Crowns of Flower-de-luces and Dolphins gilt upon them. There is a fine Arcade in the Market over the Conduit, with the French Kings-Armes upon it, supported by two Angels, and adorned with Trophies. In short, as to its Fortifications, 'tis a noble place, the Magnificence of the French King appears in it, and deserves a better description than I can give it, which has made me wander from the account I was giving of the Armies march by and through the Town. That Evening we incamped by Leuse, the place where the Mareschal de Luxemburgh fell upon Prince Waldecks Rear-guard with the Cavalry of the Houshold in 1691, our Left was at Lignes upon the Dender, that runs from Leuse by Lignes and Irchonwetz to Aeth; our Right made an elbow from the Cen∣ter, where we had Leuse upon our Front to Harquignies to∣wards Tournay, where the Elector of Bavaria had his Quar∣ters, and the King took his at Grames.

That same Evening Lieutenant-General Tettan, Major-General
[62]
L. Meleniere, and two Brigadiers, with a Detachment of 60 Men per Battalion, was commanded to the Scheld to post himself over against the Village of Hanterive, in order to pass the River. We heard firing at Tournay for the arrival of the Mareschal de Villeroy, who as we said before had been de∣tach'd from the Camp at Ausart letong with a good Body of Horse, and all the Dragoons of the Army to pass the Sambre at Maubeuge, and the Scheld at Conde, and so to make all possible diligence to joyn the Marquiss De la Valette, who up∣on our march towards Flanders was ordered to leave Courtray, and to post himself at Pont de Espieres, where the French Line (of which we have given a sufficient account in our last Years History) does terminate it self upon the Scheld. The Ma∣reschal de Villeroy at his passing through the Town of Tournay, found Monsieur de l' Arteloire ready with a Train of Artillery to go down the Scheld under his Convoy to Pont de Espieres. When he had joyned the Marquiss de la Vallette, they left Pont de Espieres, and marched down the Scheld about a League lower, and posted themselves at Hanterive, where they arri∣ved on the other side of the Scheld much about the same time that Lieutenant-General Tettan was got by Escanaffe on this, betimes in the Morning. We attempted to lay a Bridge of Boats upon the River, but the French opposed it with their small Shot, and were much superiour to our Detachment; for according to the French account, the Marquiss de la Valette had then 15 Battalions, 9 Regiments of Horse and 2 of Dra∣goons, and besides was now joyned by the Mareschal de Ville∣roy. Lieutenant General Tettan had 15 pieces of Cannon sent with him, which was disposed in 3 several Batteries which be∣gun to play upon the Enemy; their Cannon was not come up so soon as ours, but they intrenched themselves just upon the other side of the River, where our Cannon did them some considerable damage: Of Maulevriers Regiment, by their ac∣count, 1 Lieutenant was killed and 25 Men. Our own people could easily see our Cannon do execution upon them, being so near one another▪ A little after the French began to fire upon us from 2 Batteries on their side, but I have not heard of any execution or damage they did us at that time. The same
[63]
Morning the Duke of Wirtemberg had passed the Scheld at Audenarde with the 7 Brigades of Horse and the 2 of Foot, of which we have given an account already, for which reason, as the Mareschal de Villeroy had intrenched upon the River to hinder our passage, he was also obliged to fortifie his Rear with a Retrenchment, to cover himself from the Duke of Wirtem∣berg, who upon His Majesties Orders was marching up to attack him in the Rear, whilst we should force our passage in the Front. I shall now leave things in this disposition upon the Scheld, and return to both the Armies.

The 14th we decamped from Grames, and marched towards the Scheld, which was now but 2 Leagues from the Right of our Army. We passed not far from the foot of Mount Trinite, and the Left Flank of our Columns was reckoned within 4 English Miles of Tournay. We heard in the Morning upon our march great firing at this place, which at first was suppo∣sed to be Signals for their Army and neighbouring Garrisons, but by the regularity of the fire we found it to be rather a Salute. In effect the Dauphine passed this Morning through the Town, and was saluted with a triple discharge of the Cannon round the place; the Army followed him, which in two nights and one day had marched from Mons to this place. We left them at Mons the 12th, where they were got betimes in the Morning; they refreshed themselves the best part of that day, except the Brigade of Guards that was sent to Condé, where it was put on board of Bilanders to come down the Scheld to Tournay by water, where I suppose it arrived as soon as the Mareschal de Villeroy, and with him joyned the Marquis de la Valette. The 12th in the Evening the French Army left Mons, and marched night and day (only halting for rest now and then) and so came to Tournay the 14th early in the Morning; but the Waggons of the Country were order∣ed all along to take up the Sick and the Weary, and upon every halt, there was a provision of Brandy ready to refresh the Men. The 14th about Noon our Right Wing came up near the River, but it was then too late to have undertaken to force the passage, and for the Army to have gone over, for which reason 'twas ordered to halt, and the Weather
[64]
proved so bad just at that time, that it would have been im∣possible to have undertaken it, though there had been day enough left for it. We had this Evening and most of the Night following, a violent storm of Rain and Wind, which made the wayes very deep and heavy; the Army was ordered to incamp in the ground where it stood upon the halt, and every Brigade to incamp the most conveniently it could, with∣out any regard to the niceness of a Line; the King took his Quarters this Night at the Chateau de Cordes, and the Elector at Chastelet: And the Dauphine being now come up with the Body of the French Army to joyn the Mareschal de Villeroy, so that though we had forced the passage of the River, yet still we could not prevent the French Army from incamping between Harleber and Courtray, where they covered their Country in Flanders; and besides the French having drawn all their Forces in this side of the Country, which gave the King way for another undertaking may be of as great consequence; His Majesty did not think it convenient to attempt the passage here, where there might have been a great deal of Blood shed, but no advantage on our side, though we had forced it, be∣cause the Enemy would still have been Masters of the Camp at Courtray, which equally covered their Lines on both sides of the Lys. The King therefore resolved to leave the French where they were, and to pass the Scheld about two Leagues below at Audenarde.

The French very much magnified their speedy Marches to prevent our passage of the Scheld before them, that in Four Days they should with their whole Army pass and re▪pass the Sambre, and pass the Scheld at Tournay, and be the fifth incam∣ped on the other side of the River, to oppose the passage of our Army: 'Tis said, that the Mareschal de Luxembourg valued it more than the Battle of Landen; but if he valued it more, it did not cost him much less, for 'tis supposed that this violent March has cost him at least Three Thousand Men, and his Ca∣valry has been almost ruined by it, so far that the French King is now forced to reform his Cavalry, (as he did the last Year,) and to reduce the Troops yet to a less Number, which the last Winter he had brought to Forty: (I have heard that he has re∣duced
[65]
them to Twenty Five a Troop▪) The French Army might have been followed by the Scent which they left behind of dead Men and Horses, which were to be found all along the Road it went; so that we may say, The French have suffered as much in this March as they could have done in a Battle, either in Men or Horses. It has been reported, that the French King has writ a Letter to the Army, to be read at the Head of every Regiment, by which he thanked the Dauphine, the Mareschal of France, the Lieutenant-General, and other Generals, and all the Army, but more particularly the Suisse and French In∣fantry, for the great Services they had done him in this speedy March, by which they have saved his Country in Flanders from the Invasion intended by the Enemies This indeed is a very different Language from what we had last Year from him after the Battle of Landen; there was nothing then but what he could expect after so considerable a Victory, and there was nothing but what his Enemies ought to fear after so great a Defeat; but now he seems to recant in his Letter, and own that he was mi∣staken, and thanks his Army for running as fast as they could, (and so fast that it has suffered as much as in a Battle,) to save his conquered Country from being invaded by the Enemies, who last Year were to fear every thing after the loss of the Bat∣tel of Landen. This is a very different Note from the first, and would make but a very ill concert with it: Such a thing must make his Subjects sensible, either that the state of Affairs is very much altered to their disadvantage, or that their King is strangely transported with success. Whether this Letter was read or no at the Head of every Regiment, I cannot tell; but such a Letter has been Published at Paris.

Because the French made so quick and diligent a March to prevent our passage of the Scheld, it has given occasion to seve∣ral Men, who are generally rash in giving their Judgments of things, to extol very much the Enemies Conduct in this Occa∣sion, and as much to blame our own, without examining the different circumstances of the one and of the other: What I shall say at present is not to lessen the Wisdom and Conduct of our Enemies, or the Commendation they deserve; for their March was as wisely contrived, and managed with as little loss as
[66]
the great diligence they used was capable of; I shall only shew, that considering our circumstances, and those of the Enemy, 'tis no wonder they could make such diligence as to get before us to defend the passage of the Scheld, and it could be no want of Conduct on our Side if they could make so much larger Marches than we, as to be able to be there before us; for the French had wholly the advantage of the Country on their side. From the Meuse to Audenarde we met with no Garrison of ours upon the March, but that of Aeth; the French they had in their way Namur, Charleroy, Mons, Conde, Valencionnes, and Tournay; and unless when we passed by the Plain of Cambron, and the Town of Aeth, we marched upon the Enemy's Coun∣try, but the French still near their own numerous Garrisons: From whence the Enemy had this advantage over us for a speedy March, that the Boors were all fled to their Garrisous with their Effects, from whence they could not onely get Supplies of Refreshments for their Infantry upon every halt, but also Waggons to bring the Baggage, the Sick and the wearied Sol∣diers after them, in so much that though their Battalions were not of One Hundred Men each, at their coming up to a Camp or Halt, yet still by Night all the rest were brought up in Waggons, who could not march and follow the Army; and the Soldiers Bagagge being carried in the same Waggons, they marched only with their Arms so much lighter than ours This is a conveniency the French had, and which 'tis plain we want∣ed: Besides, the French, marching by so many of their Garri∣sons, could be supplied with fresh Battalions which had suffered no Fatigues in the Field, but could hasten with so much the more ease to the Scheld. Another conveniency, the French marched without their Baggage, which was brought up afterwards by the Waggons of the Countrey, who had retired generally to to the neighbouring Garrisons; but our Baggage must march with us, or be left to the Enemies, over whose Country we marched, or it must have been sent so far about, that we must have laid many more Nights than the French without Tent or Cover The French had no occasion to march with their Artil∣lery, being to act upon the defensive: They had a sufficient Train ready at Tournay to defend the Passage of the Scheld, so
[67]
that they left their Train in their Garrisons to come up leasurely after them; but we were obliged to have our Train along with us, and to proportion our Marches to the Fatigues the Artillery Horses could endure, or else leave them exposed to the Ene∣mies Garrisons, by which we passed. The French had another great advantage of the Scheld; for when once they were come up between Mons and Condé, they could send down by water from Condé to Tournay, upon the Scheld, any thing that might incumber the March of their Army, or any Detachment of Forces which they thought sufficient to oppose our passage of the Scheld, till they themselves could come up; they sent this way the Brigade of Guards, according to their own account, (and may be more) which sail'd down the River night and day, till they had joyned the Mareschal de Villeroy and the Marquiss De la Valette. Now any impartial Reader must own these to be great advantages which the French had over us in this March, and such as may very well equal the difference there was between the way the French had to go to the Scheld and we, which at most cannot amount to one part in three, which the Reader may observe if he will be pleased to consult the Map. Nothing can be alledged against our diligence, but the Halt we made at Sombref the 9th. but of that we have given an account above. And at last, these who so willingly pass their Judgments upon the Conduct of our Army, don't know whether their was at bottom any other Design, but to bring the French from the Meuse to the Scheld, to make room for the Siege of Huy, whith (as it shall hereafter appear) was a place of great consequence to us, and if it was so, then the French by their speedy March helped our very Designs instead of op∣posing them: Or if the French would keep a Body near the Meuse for the conservation of Huy, then that would have made way for some Siege in Flanders, because the French were not able to act defensively on both sides. Whatever was the design, it appears that we did what we could to make the French be∣lieve it was upon Flanders, because upon our March from Mount St. André, Major-General Cohorne was commanded from Liege with Twelve Battalions, and Six Squadrons of Liege-Dragoons, to march by Brusselles towards Ghendt. This was sufficient to
[68]
give the French the Alarm in Flanders; and accordingly they left Huy open to a Siege, rather than leave their Countrey in Flanders exposed to an Invasion.

Thus I have endeavoured to state, as justly as possibly I could, the account of this great March which has made so much noise in the World, and in which the French have so much applauded their diligence. I shall now return to both the Armies, which we have left on both sides of the Scheld. Our Army (as we said before) had incamped the 14th. with the Right near the Scheld, the Elector's Quarter upon the Right at Chastelet, and the King's at Cordes. The Dauphine having passed the Scheld this Day at Tournay, could not be hindred of the Camp of Courtray, and besides, the Evening proved so bad, that though we would then have endeavoured to have passed the Scheld at Hanterive, yet we could not. The next day the Army was ordered to march towards Audenarde: We came at Escanaffe in presence of the French Army, incamped with the Right at Hanterive, and the Left at Avelghem, all along the Scheld, though I believe that the whole Army was not there, but at hand between it and Courtray, to observe our Motions. Ge∣neral Tettan was Posted just on the other side of the River, with his Detachment and Field-Pieces, but the Caunon was silent on both sides. From Escanaffe we marched all along the Scheld towards Audenarde, and incamped with our Right at Melde by Audenarde, where the Electot had his Quarter, and the Left at Escanaffe, over-against the Left of the French Army. Our Left was here close under the Cannon of the Enemy, so that in the Evening, when we were come to our Ground, the French Cannon plaid very briskly upon our Left, where our Two Brigades of Foot, Commanded by Major▪General Ramsay, and our English Horse most Exposed, yet I have not heard of any Men killed, but we lost fourteen or fifteen Horses; but the French used their greatest Endeavours to do mischief to Tettan when he came off with his Detachment, and Field-Pieces, from under their very Retrenchments, on the opposite side of the River, where he lay under cover, but could not get off with∣out Exposing himself very much to the Enemies Cannon: He remained quietly in his Post for this reason all the day, and took
[69]
the opportunity of the Evening to come off, which he did with∣out any loss. The King, at this Camp before the Scheld, took his Quarter at Berghem, upon the very Bank of the River, where it was very much Exposed to the Enemies Cannon. The Rear-Guard, which was brought up by the First Battalion, and the Battalion of the Second Regiment of English Guards, and the First Battalion of Dutch Guards, which had incamped upon the King's Quarters at Cordes, which was a considerable way from the Line of the Army, could not come up before the next Morning; for which reason there was no Orders given over∣night to march the next day.

The 16th in the Morning the French began to play again upon our Left with their Cannon, where they killed some of our Men, and our Generals Quarters were very much ex∣posed here, being just upon the River, but none of them suf∣fered any damage Besides the Batteries the French had against our Left, we perceived that they were bringing of Cannon down along the River to take up the length of our Line, and have Batteries from Right to Left; one of their General Offi∣cers came up in the Morning to view the Wind-mill between Peteghem and the River, which absolutely commanded our Right; but to hinder the Enemies bringing Cannon down any farther, we had Batteries made upon our side from the Kings Quarters along our Left, to hinder the Enemies from advan∣cing any further. The Cannon played on both sides all the Morning, but without any considerable execution that I have heard of. The King rid out early to observe the countenance of the Enemy; part of their Army was making a motion to∣wards their Left, which gave us reason to suspect that they design'd to march, and take up the Camp of Peteghem, a high ground in the way from Audenarde to the Enemies Lines, from whence they might have Canonaded the Duke of Wirtemberg (who upon His Majesties resolution of passing the Scheld lower at Audenarde, was countermanded under the Cannon of this place) from whence likewise the Enemy would have very much incommoded our passage of the Scheld even here, for which reason His Majesty immediately order'd the Four Bri∣gades of Erle, Stuart, Alfeldt and Haxhausen, and the Two
[70]
Battalions of Scots Guards, to march and leave their Tents standing, to joyn the Duke of Wirtemberg, and take up the high ground between Poteghem and Audenarde; these Brigades were Commanded by the Count de Nassau, and Major-Gene∣rals, Churchill, La Meleniere, Miremont and Ellenberg. We passed the Scheld at Audenarde the same Morning, and the Two Battalions of Scheltinga and Prince Charles of Branden∣burgh came out of the Garrison to joyn us. The French upon this motion were afraid they were coming to surround them, for which reason they immediately left their Camp at Haute∣rive and Avelghem, and marched directly to Courtray, where they incamped between it and Harleber; but a Party of Thirty Men of the Enemies that had advanced too near Peteghem, were all made Prisoners. Upon the removal of the French from Hauterive and Avelghem, the Army that had passed the Scheld was ordered to halt, and to incamp upon the ground where it stood, every Brigade to take the most convenient way of incamping for it self: About half of the Infantry of the Army had passed the River, being now Six Brigades of Foot, under the Command of the Duke of Wirtemberg. We said above that Count Thian, when the Duke of Wirtemberg was commanded before to Audenarde, had Orders to come up with his Body from Ghendt, and joyn him here. He came up accordingly, and incamped not far from Audenarde, between it and Deinse, but upon the March of the French to Courtray and Harleber, he was sent back to Deinse, where he had left Holles's Regiment for the security of the Pass.

The 16th the rest of the Army passed the Scheld at Aude∣narde, and below it upon a Bridge of Boats. The Scheld above Audenarde makes a great kind of a Lake, which being reduced in a narrow Channel to run through the Town, does make the best and the chief defence of it; and generally all along between Audenarde and Tournay, the banks of the Scheld are low, and the ground about it a Morass, so that it is not passable by an Army at many places, and the passage may be defended with a little opposition. The Army marched this day between the Lys and the Scheld, the King took his Quar∣ter at Wanneghem, our Right made an angle from Cruyshoutem
[71]
(the Elector of Bavaria's Quarter) towards Deinse and the Lys; our Left stretched out towards the Scheld by Peteghem; our Front was covered all along with close ground and De∣files, for which reason we could not incamp upon a Line, but some Brigades more advanced and some less; our Front run∣ning between the Lys and the Scheld faced exactly the Enemies Lines which we attacked last year, which were not above Three Leagues from our Camp▪ The Enemy upon our in∣camping did not think it convenient to remain upon the same side of the Lys with us at Harleber, but on the 18th they passed the River at Courtray, and incamped with their Right at this place (the Dauphins Quarter) and their Left at Moorselle towards Menin, where they were posted equally to defend their Lines between the Scheld and the Lys, and their Towns between the Lys and the Sea, but the Marquis de la Valette was posted at Pont de Espieres to defend their Lines towards the Scheld: however the French by this motion left the Coun∣try open before us, and gave us liberty of Foraging to their very Lines.

The 19th our heavy Baggage came up to the Camp; it had been sent away the 5th under the Convoy of Brigadier Wynnes Dragoons, and a Man of a Company. They marched by Louvain, Vilvor de and Ghendt, and so joyned us in this place. We have said before that upon our marching from Mount St. André towards the Scheld, the King had ordered Major-Ge∣neral Cohorne with Twelve Battalions, and some Liege Dra∣goons to march towards Ghendt, which obliged the Enemy to bring all their Forces in Flanders to make head against so great an Army as we should have after the joyning of all these Forces. The 15th Major-General Cohorne came to Vilvor de with the Body under his Command, and the 21th he marched through the Town of Ghendt, and incamped just without the Town, upon the Canal of Bruges; he had then with him Three Battalions of Swerin, and the Regiments of Stockhansen, Lindeboom, Harsolt, Ameliswert, Prince Christian Lodowics, Essen, Vaudermeuten, Churprince and Friesheim, and Two Re∣giments of Liege Dragoons. The Enemy having now left the Meuse open, the King sent Order• to Maestricht to prepare a
[72]
Train of Artillery, and all other necessaries for a Siege, to send it up by water to Liege; and all the Boats belonging to Maestricht and Liege were taken for the Kings Service.

The 22th we made a great Detachment under the Command of Count de Noyelles Lieutenant-General, towards the Right, to cover Pioneers, who had come up to cut ways through the inclosures we had before us; and we had Bridges laid upon the Lys and upon the Scheld for the conveniency of the Army to Forage on the other side of both these Rivers, and also to leave the Enemies in suspence (who were now busie in fortify∣ing of Courtray for a Winter-Quarter) which way we design'd to march next, whether farther in Flanders, or back again to∣wards the Meuse.

The 24th the heavy Baggage was commanded back again to Ghendt, and Pontons were sent to make Bridges upon the Lys at Mechlen.

The 25th. the Right Wing of Horse, and Body of Foot, was ordered to march towards the Lys, except the Brigade of Guards, which remained incamped at the King's Quarter; and and the same Day Lieutenant-General Dewits was ordered to re-pass the Scheld at Audenarde, and to march towards the Meuse with the Brandenbourg Horse under his Command.

The 26th. the whole Army marched, and passed the Lys upon two Bridges at Mechlen. We began now to come in the close Country of Flanders; and this is the reason that part of the Army was ordered to march from the Camp at Wanneghem the day before, because the Defiles were such here, that the whole Army could not have marched from Wanneghem, and pass the Lys, in one day. After we had passed the Lys, we in∣camped with our Right at Caneghem, where the Elector had his Quarter, and the Left between Markeghem and Wacken upon the Lys; the King took his Quarter at Wouterghem about Three English Miles from Deinse; the Artillery and Baggage march•d by Deinse and came up here to us the same Day.

The 29th. Count Thian march'd from Deinse, and came up to joyn us; he incamped before our Left at Wacken, where the River Mandel that comes from Rouselar falls into the Scheld. The Second Battalion of the Royal Regiment came to incamp
[73]
in the Line, and Colonel Lauders was ordered to joyn Count Thian in its place; he was likewise reinforced with Mathars Regiment of Dragoons. The 29th the Body of Foot and the Two Brigades interlined in the Right Wing of Horse, together with the Spanish Horse upon the Right, and the Brigade of Life-Guards and Boncourts, with Eppinger and Dopfs Dragoons upon the Left, marched by Thielt, and so came to Rouselar: The ground being very close here, and generally all over the Province of Flanders, we had no occasion for Horse; the De∣files were very bad, and the March long and tedious. The King took his Quarters at Rouselar, our Right reached to Hooghleede, where the Elector of Ravaria had his Quarter, and our Left by Rumbek upon the River Mandel; the ground upon which we incamped was all high inclosures, with rowes of Trees upon all the Hedges, which made the Country here∣abouts so close, that one Battalion could hardly see those upon the Right or Left. The Town of Rouselar is called in French Roulers (as most of the Towns in this Country have a French and a Dutch name, which are often very different from one another) and situated near the Springs of the River Mandel, which falls into the Lys at Wacken. The Country all about it is very even, though Woody, for which reason if this little River could afford more water for a good Fosse, the Town might be very well fortified; it is in the Chatellenie of Ipres three Leagues from thence, nine from Ghendt, three from Courtray, four from Dixmuyde, and six from Bruges; this is reckoned the last place of the Pajis conquis, and in time of Peace the French King had Officers to gather his Duties for Goods Im∣ported or Exported, as being his utmost Frontier. The Duke of Newbourgh, now Elector Palatine of the Rhine, is Lord of this place, but he has a bad Tenant in the French King. The Foot being incamped at Rouselar, all the Horse remained at Wouterghem under the Command of my Lord of Athlone, aud the Two Brigades of Foot interlined, under the Command of Major-General Ramsay; but the Dutch Horse of the Right Wing joyned the Left. Though we were incamped here in very strong and close ground, yet 'twas commanded by the heighth or little Hill of Hooghleede (where we had our Right)
[74]
which is a rare thing in this level Country: We made several Redoubts upon it for the security of our Camp, this being the only place by which we could be attacked. The French upon our March to this place made several Detachments from their Army for the security of their Country; the Mareschal de Villeroy was commanded with a Body to incamp by Ipres to op∣pose our passage of the Canal, which goes from this place by the Knock and Furnes to Dunkirk; and the Marquis de la Va∣lette had Orders to leave Pont de Espieres to come and post himself between Furnes and the Fort of Knock for the defence of these places. We have given an account of both of them in our first relation for the Year 1692, to which I shall refer the Reader. I must not omit to say that the Dutch Artillery upon our March to Rouselar, was sent from the Camp at Wou∣terghem to Malines its usual Winter-quarter.

The King having now brought all the Enemies Forces in Flanders (except the Body of Horse Commanded by the Mar∣quis de Harcourt, which was not sufficient to hinder or oppose his designs) had resolved to besiege Huy, for which end (as we have said before) great preparations of Ammunitions, and all other necessaries for a Siege had been prepared at Maestricht; His Majesty had sent also Lieutenant-General de Witz from the Camp at Wanneghem with the Brandenburgh Horse, to joyn the Liege Forces to invest the place; but the Care and Conduct of the Siege was kept for the Duke of Holstein Ploen, Velt-Mareschal General of the States Forces; accordingly upon our March from Wouterghem to Rouselar, the King ordered the Duke of Holstein to go and Command the Forces to be imploy∣ed in the Siege of Huy, and Major-General Cohorne who had remained with his Body (of which we have already given an account) near Ghendt till this time, was commanded to march towards Liege.

The 31th the Three Battalions of Guards, the first of the English Guards, the second of Dutch Guards, and the third, the second Battalion of Scots Guards, were ordered to incamp on the other side of the Town of Rouselar towards Ipres, to cover the Kings Quarters; for the Country being close and Woody made the Enemies Parties very bold. The same day
[75]
Quarter-Master-General Dopf was sent to Dixmuyde to observe the Place; he had an Escorte of 600 Men, Commanded by Colonel Trelawney; at his return he gave His Majesty an ac∣count of the Place, upon which 'twas Resolved to fortifie it.

[ Sept. 1.] The Campagne being now far spent, and this being like to be the last Camp before we separated into Winter Quarters, the Army had Orders to put down their Tents, and to make Ba∣racques or Huts of straw, which at this time was to be found in great abundance about this place; for no Army had incamp∣ed near it for many Years. The same day the Prisoner, of which we have given an account in the March from Sombref to Nivelle, that was taken in one of the Ammunition Waggons with a lighted Match, was burnt alive, after he had first his Right hand cut off, and flung into the fire; he was put to the Torture to confess his Ruin, and was found guilty by the Court-Marshal of designing to blow up our Powder Waggons; I have not yet seen the Copy of the Sentence, and so I cannot give a farther account of his Crime, and of the Persons by whom he was set on; I have only heard that it was the Marquis de Grammont. We had such an Accident in the Campagne of 1691. the Evening that we returned from Beaumont to the Camp at Court Sur Heure: The thing was undertaken by one of the Dutch Traine; he actually set fire to Two Bombs, which put the whole Army into an Alarm, and if the Gunners had not hazarded themselves very much, to fling them out of the Waggons, it would in all probability have set all our Am∣munion Waggons on fire; he underwent afterwards the same punishment at the Camp of St. Gerrard; his Right hand was cut off, and burnt before his face, and was himself afterwards burnt alive with a small fire, which he indured with a great deal of constancy.

The Third, an Ensign of King James his Irish Guards left the Enemies Camp, and came over to our Army; and the same day one Pierce Oliver, that had been a Sergeant in the Dragoons of Valencar and Native of Tournay, was hanged near the Ele∣ctor of Bavaria's Quarter: He had deferted the Spanish Service, and went over to the Enemies, where he turned Partisan; he
[76]
[ Septem.] was taken Prisoner the day before by a Spanish Party, and was hanged the next day for a Deserter. The same the Duke of Wirtemburg began the Review of the Infantry, and Reviewed this day the Brigade of Guards, the next day he Reviewed the rest of the Body of Foot; the same day His Majesty went to My Lord of Athlone's Camp under a strong Escorte, and and because this close Countrey was hardly ever without some of the Enemies Parties, they suprized one, of which they made Fifty Prisoners, killed some, and dispersed the rest. The King having dined with the Lord of Athlone, returned the same night to the Camp, after he had ordered a Detachment of Thirty Squadrons of Horse, and some Dragoons, to march towards Aeth under the Command of Count Tilly, Major-General: This Detachment was made to cover Brusselles from the Garrison of Mons, which made some Incursions to the very Canal of Brusselles; and also to observe the Enemy, in case they should make any Detachments towards Huy. The same day the Re∣giments of Hackelem, Dedem, and Holstein Beck, were sent to reinfore the Army to be imployed in the Siege of Huy; they were Commanded by Brigadier Dedem, and followed the next day by the Regiments of Birkenfeldt, Zobel, and Sparre, and the 6th by the Regiments of the Rhingrave, Holstein-Norbourg, Goar, and Dumont, under the Command of the Duke of Hol∣stein Norbourg, Brigadier; the Regiment of Lowenhaupt was detached the same Day towards the Canal of Brusselles, to se∣cure it from the Attempt of Parties.

The 7th. the Duke of Wirtemberg's Quarter took fire, which began in his Kitchin, and the Wind was so high that it presently consumed above Twenty Houses to the Leeward, in the Street that goes to Ghendt, most of them being covered with Straw; but the Duke's Servants had the time to save the best of his Baggage, and Furniture for the House, so that he suffered no great Dammage by it. The same day all the English Horse and Dragoons, and all the Cavalry upon English Pay, came up to Rouselar from the Camp of Wouterghem, under the Command of Monsieur d' Anverquerque, and incamped that Night upon the Left between Rombeck and Inghelmonster. Wynne's Dra∣goons, that had been sent from the Camp of Mount St. André to
[77]
Ghendt to get their Horses in better case, being now refreshed from the Fatigues they had indured, came up to the Camp along with them, and the 8th they were all sent to canton upon the Villages between our Right and Dixmuyde. My Lord of Athlone left at the same time the Camp of Wouterghem, and marched to canton the Dutch Cavalry and Dragoons from Nivelle to St John de Lerne, upon the Lys, between Deinse and Ghendt. Major General Ramsay came the 8th. to the Camp with the Two Brigades of Foot under his Command, and incamped upon the Left, where he flanked it near Rombeck. My Lord of Athlone's Camp being thus separated, Count Thian was ordered to march from Wacken back to Deinse to fortifie that Place, and the government of it, during the Winter, was given to Briga∣dier Off arell. This Place is situated upon the Lys, Three Leagues higher above Ghendt; it lyes upon both sides of the River, and in a convenient Post to cover Ghendt, and part of the Canal of Bruges, from the Enemies Parties, who before would venture up to the Gates of the Town; and besides, our Forces now were so numerous that we could not quarter them conveniently in the Frontier Towns and Garrisons; for which reason we have fortified several such Posts this Year, to inlarge our Quarters, and advance them as far as we could towards the Enemy's Frontier.

The 8th. the Dauphine left the Enemy's Camp between Courtray and Menin, to return to Versailles; by Eight in the Morning he parted from Courtray, being saluted by a Triple Discharge of the Enemy's Cannon; by Twelve he arrived at Lisle, and was met at the Gates by the Mareschal de Bouflers, the Governour of the Place since the Death of the Mareschal de Humieres, and by the Magistrates; all the Cannon was fired thrice round the Town and Citadel; he was treated by the Mareschal de Bouflers, and so continued his way towards Versailles. We could hear very plainly the Enemy's Cannon upon this occasion.

The Resolution being taken to fortifie Dixmude for a Winter Quarter, after the Report which Quarter-Master-General Dopf made of it to His Majesty, Six Regiments were Commanded on the 9th. to this Place, the Two French Regiments of Belcastel
[78]
and Marton, three Danes, the Queen's, Prince Christian and Jutland, and the Dutch Regiment of Aver; they were Com∣manded by Major-General Ellenbergh, who has been made Governour of the Place; Captain Cock's Company of Gunners and Matrosses was sent at the same time, with Fifteen Pieces of Cannon and Ammunitions, and the Boors were set at work to fortifie the Place, assisted with a Detachment out of every one of these Regiments. I have given a Description of this Place in my Relation of the Campagne of 1692. to which I refer the Reader. I have not heard we have altered any thing in this Fortification, but only made up again the Works which the French left last Spring when they abandoned it. The same Day the Regiments of Bernstorf-Zell, and Bulo, were detached from the Camp to march towards Brusselles and Louvain, and the Suisse Regiment of Milune, and the Regiment of Luo to Maestricht.

The 10th. the King went towards Dixmuyde, to Review the English Cavalry and Dragoons, which appeared in very good order, at such a time of the Year, and after so many Marches.

The 11th. His Majesty Reviewed the Infantry, which drew out of the Camp upon Two Lines, all the General Officers being posted upon their several Divisions of the Army, where they saluted the King as he rid along the Line His Majesty rid round every Battalion of the Army, to take a more special and exact Review of them, and his Aid de Camps took an account of the depth and number of the Files, to compute the Strength of each Battalion. The Body of the Infantry ap∣peared generally in very good order, the Regiments very full, and in a better condition than they have been at this time of the Year since the beginning of the War, notwithstanding the great Marches we had for so many Days together, from the Meuse to the Scheld. Indeed the Weather was all along very favourable and free from heat, which gave a great deal of ease to the Sol∣diers, who rather marched better the last Days than the first. The same Day the King Reviewed the Foot, the Dutch Troop of Life-Guard was ordered to march towards Loo to make the Relays for His Majesty from Breda to that place.

[79]
The 12th the Elector of Bavaria reviewed the Spanish and Bavarian Forces, His Majesty being present, and they ap∣peared in good order as all the Army had done. The King din'd afterwards with Prince Vaudemont.

The 15th the King went to Dixmuyde to view the place himself, to see the condition of the Works, and what forward∣ness they were in, and His Majesty this day dined with my Lord Auverquerque that commanded the English Cavalry and Dragoons canton'd about this place. The same day the King had an Express from the Duke of Holstein from the Camp be∣fore Huy, that the 13th at night we had advanced our works and approaches to the point of the Counterscarp of the Forts Rouge and Picard, that our Cannon had made breaches large enough to make an assault the next day upon these Forts. This place was invested the 7th by the Duke of Holstein with the Dutch and Brandenburgh, and the Prince of Tilly with the Liege Forces. The 9th the Artillery and Mortars came up by Water from Liege. The 10th, 11th and 12th, the Besiegers worked at their Batteries, upon which they mounted their Cannon and Mortars. This Day their Batteries began to play upon the Two Forts, and the Night they opened the Trenches at their several Attacks. I shall say no more of the Siege of Huy, but what we had in our Camp by Expresses from the Duke of Holstein, till we come to the News of the Capitula∣tion, after which I shall incert the Journal of that Siege, to give a more particular and exact account of it.

To return to the Camp at Rouselar. The 15th in the Even∣ing we heard very great firing towards Dunkirk, by which we soon imagined that our Fleet was before the place Commanded by Sir Cloudesly Shovel, Vice-Admiral: The Mareschal de Villeroy upon the news of our Fleets being before the place, left immediately his Camp near Ipres and went to Dunkirk, accompanied with several General Officers to see the success and issue of the undertaking, to be there ready for the defence of the place. Our Machines had no success here, and the Enemy were so well provided for our coming, that their Out-Forts did not permit our Bomb-Ketches to come near enough to do any damage to it.

[80]
The 16th the King had by an Express from the Duke of Holstein, the news of his having carried the Forts Rouge and Picard by Assault, with about Three Hundred of the Enemy put to the Sword, and Seventy only escaped out of the Fort Picard to the Castle, with the Commanding Officer, but a Lieutenant-Colonel that Commanded in the Fort Rouge was killed in the Trench, where he flung himself in the midst of our Men after he saw the Fort so easily carried by our Forces.

The 17th the Regiments of Lesley, Tiffeny, Maitland, Tergueson and Buchan, were detached from the Camp to march to Dixmuyde, being appointed to have their Winter-Quarters in the Camerlings Ambackt, or the Country about the Canal of Newport, which is not far from this place. They made Ba∣raques or Huts of Straw without the Works of Dixmuyde, where they continued incamped to work with the Garrison at the Fortification till it has been finished; after which they went into their Winter Quarters: The Fortification of Dixmuyde went on hitherto but leasurely for want of Men, for which reason these Regiments were detach'd to forward the work. The Camp of Rouselar being strong by the closeness of the ground, and the Wood and Defiles about it, gave us the op∣portunity of making securely as many Detachments as we wanted, though we were incamped just by the Enemies Garri∣sons and their own Army too. The same day the King by an Express from the Duke of Holstein, had an account that the Besiegers before Huy had made themselves Masters the 15th of a Tower that commands the way that leads up to the Castle, defended by the Major of the Castle and Forty Men, and the 18th, that our Batteries were playing upon the Castle, since the taking of the Two Forts Rouge and Picard, which com∣manded it, and from whence our Batteries played with such success against it, that a breach was made, and that he hoped in a very short time to be Master of the place. The Cannon, when once we were Masters of the Two Forts, did so much annoy the Besieged in the Castle, that a Centinel did not dare to shew himself upon the Ramparts of it.

The 19th the Army had Orders to Forage all the Churches and Cloisters before us in the Chatellenie of Ipres, and to take
[81]
out the Corn they had there: The Town of Rouselar was not spared, and the Cloister of the Augustines was Foraged as well as the rest, the Country before being the Frontier of the Pajis conquis, 'twas thought convenient to destroy the Corn and Fo∣rage about the Enemies Garrisons as much as possibly we could, and the Enemy by our incamping here being kept within their own Garrisons, were no less inconvenient to the Country round about: They had incamped between Courtray and Menin since the 18th of the last Month, insomuch that though they had agreed with the Chatellenie of Lisle to excuse it from Forage, yet we kept them so long here, that they were forced to break the bargain, and not only the Chatellenie of Lisle was forced to send Forage to the Army, but the Towns and Villages much more remote from the Enemies Frontiers were obliged to do the same thing. The 19th day Count Tilly, Major-General of the States Forces that had been commanded with a Detachment of Thirty Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons towards Aeth, had the misfortune to be taken Prisoner in his own Quarters at Mafle, between Aeth and Mons, by the treachery of one of his own Domestick Servants, who run away to Mons, and in∣formed the Enemy of the condition of the Major-Generals Quarters, what Guard it had upon it, and how it might be surprized; who accordingly sent immediately a strong Party of Dragoons that surprized his Quarters, made him Prisoner, and carried him to Mons: This is the same Gentleman that had the misfortune last Year to be attacked by a strong Detachment of the Enemies Horse, all of the French Kings House, near Tongres, where he was posted with Nine or Ten Squadrons of Horse, with which he was to joyn our Army; he was forced to retreat towards Maestricht with the loss of some of his Baggage; and not Count Cerclas, now Prince of Tilly, as I said last Year by a mistake.

The 20th early in the Morning the King left the Army to go by Liege and Maestricht to Loo, and so to the Hague, in order to repass the Sea. His Majesty was attended out of the Camp by the Elector of Bavaria, and all the General Officers of the Army, and had an Escorte of Fourscore Men out of each Battalion, Commanded by the Prince of Anhault Brigadier;
[82]
the Detachment out of the Kings Forces was Commanded un∣der the Prince of Anhault by Colonel Titcomb, Lieutenant-Colonels, Peyton and Corbet, and Major Sabine, they conveyed the King to Deinse, where a strong Detachment of Horse out of my Lord of Athlone's Forces, which were quartered there∣abouts, attended to conduct the King farther on His way. His Majesty passed through the Town of Ghendt, incognito, and lay that Night at Overmeere between Ghendt and Dendermond, and so His Majesty went on His Journey towards Liege, good Escortes being laid by relays all along the way. The King just at his going out of the Camp, had by an Express from the Duke of Holstein, an account that the Castle of Huy had Ca∣pitulated the 17th, and that the Garrison was to march out of the breach the next Day, with Drums beating, Colours flying, and other marks of Honour, but without Artillery, to Namur. Thus far the account of Huy, as we have had it in the Camp; but because it has been the most remarkable Action of this Campagne, I shall here incert the Journal of this Siege.

The Journal of the Siege and taking of the Town and Castle of Huy, with the several Forts belonging to it, by the Confederate Army, Commanded by His Highness the Duke of Holstein Ploen, Velt Mareschal General of the Armies of the States-General of the Ʋnited Provinces.

WE have said above that the King, pursuant to the reso∣lutions he had taken of laying Siege▪to Huy, had or∣dered the Duke of Holstein Ploen from the Camp at Wouter∣ghem to march towards the Meuse with the Body of Foot and Dragoons incamped near Ghendt, under the Command of Major-General Cohorne; that the Garrisons of Liege and Mae∣stricht had Orders at the same time to be ready to march. The Train of Artillery and Mortars, and all things necessary for a Siege were ready at Maestricht, with Boats to carry them up
[83]
the River, and expected only the junction of the Forces to form the Siege to be sent up to Huy.

The 5th Prince Cerclas of Tilly marched out of Liege to possess himself of several Posts in the Neighbourhood of Huy, with the Cavalry of the Diocess. He was followed the next Day by the Duke of Holstein, who was now joyned by the Dutch and Brandenburgh Forces, and the Cavalry Commanded by Lieutenant-General de Witz, which in going back to the Meuse from Audenarde, had marched almost the same way we came to it.

The 7th all these Forces being joyned together posted them∣selves at all the avenues leading to the place, and formally in∣vested it; Brigadier Swerin passed the Meuse with his Brigade of Foot to post himself on the opposite side of the River to the Town of Huy. I refer the Reader for the description of this place to what I said of it in my last Years History; I shall only add, that the Fort Picard, which was then imperfect, was quite finished by the French, and besides that they had made the Fort Rouge for the greater security of the place. When Huy was invested, our Army before the place consisted of the Forces following.

The List of the Confederate Army before Huy.
[84]
Duke of Holstein Velt-Mareschal General.
Prince Cerclas of Tilly, General.
De Witz Lieutenant-General.
Heyden, Cohorne and Sonsfeldt, Major-Generals.
Swerin, Lindeboom, &c. Brigadiers.
Dutch Infantry.	Brandenburgh Foot.	Brandenburgh Horse
Regim.	Battal.	Regim.	Battal.	Regim.	Squad.
Du Theil	1	Electors Guards	3	Dorfling Dragoons	4
Cohorne	1	Electoral Prince	1	Sonsfeldt Dragoons	4
Lindeboom	1	Prince Phillipe	1	Auspach Dragoons	2
Dutch Infantry.	Brandenburgh Foot.	Brandenburgh Horse
Regim.	Battal.	Regim.	Battal.	Regim.	Squad.
Swerin	3	Prince Louis	1	Horse-Granadiers	1
Stockhausen	1	Dorfling	1	Grand Musquetiers	1
Friesheim	1	Altholstein	1	Gens d' Arms	1
Ameliswert	1	Denhof	1	Life Regiment	3
Essen	1	Barfus	1	Churprince	3
Churprince	1	Heyden	1	Fleming	3
Prince Phillipe	1	Brand	1	Dorfling	3
Harsolt	1	Lottom	1	Du Hammel	3
Prince Louis	1	Doua	1	Litwits	3
Anhaltdessau	1	Slabendorf	1	Schlipenback	3
Knoring	1	Anhalt	1	 	 
Obergen	1	Hult	1	 	 
Vandermuklen	1	Horne	1	 	 
Battalions	18	Battalions	18	Squndrons	38
 	 	Liege Battalions	4	 	 
We had by this List Forty Battalions, which at Five Hun∣dred each Battalion one with another (the usual way of reckon∣ing the latter end of a Campagne) makes Twenty Thousand Foot; and Thirty Eight Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons, at One Hundred each Squadron the latter end of a Campagne, makes Three Thousand Eight Hundred Horse, by which the total of our Army before Huy consisted of Twenty Three Thousand Eight Hundred Men; the Ten Regiments which were detached from our Army at Rouselar under the Brigadiers Holstein-Norbourg and Dedem, came to the Camp before Huy but the very day of the Capitulation, for which reason I have not incerted their Names in this List.

The same Day that we invested Huy, the Count de Guis∣card, Governour of Namur, who had put himself into the place to defend it in person, went out of it betimes in the Morning under a good Escorte of Dragoons by an express Or∣der of the Court, which injoyned him to go back to his Go∣vernment
[85]
of Namur, whither he got with some difficulty: We had the News in our Camp that he was forced to leave his Baggage behind him, which fell by this means into our hands, but afterwards was returned safely to him. The Count de Guiscard at his going out paid the Garrison, which was made up of the Regiments of Ponthieu and Angoumois, con∣sisting of Twelve Companies each, which made between Thirteen and Fourteen Hundred Foot, and One free Company of Dragoons. The defence of the place was recommended to Monsieur de Regnac Commandant of the Castle. About Noon some Deputies from the Magistrates of Huy came to wait upon the Duke of Holstein by Monsieur de Regnacs leave, to make some Propositions, according to which he was willing to deliver the Keys of the Town into their hands, and to re∣tire into the Forts and Castle if the Duke would consent to them.

1. That the Roman Catholick and Apostolick Religion should be maintained in it in the state it was now.
2. That the Burghers and Inhabitants should return under the Government of their Natural Prince the Bishop of Liege, and the See being now vacant, of his Illustrious Chapter.
3. That the Magistrates, Mayors, &c. should be continued in the possession of their Charges, Priviledges, Rights and Liber∣ties, as well as the Burghers and Inhabitants of the Town.
4. That the Town being under the Power of the Allies, none of the Ecclesiasticks either Secular or Regular, nor the Burghers and Inhabitants, nor those of the Neighbourhood, which have fled thither for refuge shall be insulted, disturbed or molested in their Persons, Goods or Effects, wherever they may be.
5. That when the Allies should have taken possession of the Town they should not attack the Castle from it, and those of the Castle should not commit any Hostilities against the Forces in the Town.
6. That if the Allies were obliged to raise the Siege, and to abandon the Town, they should in no wise molest or disturb the said Ecclesiasticks, Burghers and Inhabitants, &c. nor their Effects, nor burn, ruine or plunder their Houses, nor seise
[86]
themselves of any of them, upon any pretext whatever.
7. That in case they abandon the Town, they should not de∣molish, cut down, nor blow up the Ramparts, Bulwarks, Towers, Gates, Barrieres, or any other works of defence belonging to the Town.
8. That they should not demolish nor do any damage to the great Bridge of the Town upon the Meuse, nor those built upon any Rivulets, either within the Town or liberties of it.
9. That they should not sieze themselves of, nor take any Bell, or piece of Mettal belonging to the Town, Ecclesiasticks or Inha∣bitants, neither should they cause them to be redeemed for money or otherwise.
10. That it should be Lawful for any of the Burghers and Inhabitants, to retire where they please with their Effects for the space of six Months.
11. That the Hospitals, Pious Houses and Lumber Houses, should not be molested nor disturbed in any of their Revenues or Effects.
These are the Articles upon which the Town was given up to the Allies, most of them are upon condition the Allies should raise the Siege of the place; by which it appears that the Besieged had great hopes of it. About Four in the After∣noon Monsieur de Regnac caused the following Article to be added to it.

That the Allies should not attack the Castle by the Town or Faubourgs, nor cause any Troops to pass the Bridge in a Body during the Siege; nor any Cannon, Ammunitions or any other Provisions of War; and that by vertue of this Capitulation he should deliver the next Day by Six in the Morning the Keys of the Town in the hands of the Magistrate.

This Capitulation having been agreed unto, and signed by the Duke of Holstein, and Monsieur de Regnac, the Besieged left the Town, and retired into the Castle and Forts; Four of of our Battalions entered into the place to take possession of it. Having now the Castle and Forts to besiege, the Duke of
[87]
Holstein took his Quarter upon the Hill of Coureux; with most of the Generals; we began to work at our Batteries, and we finished our Bridge of Communication at Taverne. The Ene∣my made a great Fire with their Artillery against our Works, and shot some Bombs, but without doing any considerable da∣mage. The Evening they made a Salley on that side where Major-General Cohorne Commanded, thinking to possess them∣selves of three Field-Pieces we had there, but the Guard ha∣ving perceived it gave the Alarm, and we repulsed the Enemy, with some loss on their Side.

The 9th. the Besieged continued to fire with their Artillery, but not so briskly as the day before, and some Deserters, who came over to us, reported, that they had some Gunners killed in the Fort Picard by three Pieces of Cannon which had broke. We hastened our Work at the Batteries, and other Works, and landed as fast as we could our heavy Artillery, which had come up to our Bridge of Communication at Taverne, by the Meuse, consisting of Fifty and Five battering Pieces, and Twenty Eight Mortars, besides the Cannon we had brought by Land.

The 10th. we had advice that the Besieged, resolving to de∣fend themselves to the last extremity, did work within as fast as they could, chiefly to cover themselves in their Works with Earth and Hay, to defend themselves from our Bombs: They fired upon none but those who appeared out of the Faubourgs of the Place, and made but a small Fire upon us this day, and hitherto they had killed us but very few Men

The 11th. the Enemy fired upon us with their Cannon and Mortars, with more Vigour than they had done the day be∣fore. We finished this Enening our Batteries for Cannon and Mortars; we had one upon the Hill of Coureux, the second near the Counterscarpe; Major-General Cohorné had one above Croisiers, upon the Saur; Brigadier Swerin another near St. Leonard; and Prince Circlas of Tilly had the fifth.

The 12th. the Enemy fired very briskly upon us till Nine in the Morning, that the Duke of Holstein being come to the chief Battery upon the Hill de Coureux, gave the Signal by ordering a Bomb to be fired in the Air, after which this, and all other
[88]
Batteries, both of Cannon and Mortars, fired without inter∣mission; all the Generals had posted themselves by the main Battery, to be Spectators of this Work. This Evening we opened the Trenches at the Brandenbourg Quarter, who di∣rected their Attack towards the Fort Picard; the rest did the same at their other Attacks.

The 13th. we had a thick Fog in the Morning, which inter∣rupted the Vigour of our Fire, but as soon as it was over, our Cannon and Mortars began to play with more force from all our Batteries; that of St. Leonard fired perpendicular upon the Head of the Fort Picard, to make a Breach. The Enemy, who kept themselves in their Works, fired but seldom with Two Six-pounders, of which we soon dismounted one; they fired some Vollies of Shot upon the Bridge of the Town, which caused the Duke of Holstein to send a Message to Monsieur de Regnac, to let him know, that it was against the Tenor of the Capitulation, which would oblige him to give no quarter when once he should be Master of the Castle: The Governour endea∣voured to excuse himself, but the Duke of Holstein returned for Answer by a Drum, that he was a German and could not understand the wrangling of the French. A Deserter came in, and told us, that the Besieged could not hold out much longer, that our Bombs had ruined their Well, and had broke to pieces most of their Casks filled with Beer and Water, that they had spoiled their Provisions, and put their Magazines of Fascines on fire; thereupon we push'd our Approaches to the Foot of the Counterscarpe, and the Besieged killed and wounded some of our Soldiers.

The 14th. the Enemies Fire ceased. The General held a Council of War, where it was concluded, That the Breach in the Forts Rouge and Picard being wide enough for an Assault, Orders should be given to the Brandenbourgers, who were the most advanced, to prepare themselves for it; and all things being ready, the Signal was given about Four in the Afternoon, after which they made the Assault upon the Fort Picard with so much bravery, that in less than half an hour they carried it Sword in hand, without any great resistance from the Enemy, of whom they made a great slaughter: The Fort Rouge had the
[89]
same success; our People came into the place with the Enemies, before they had time to know themselves. The Paris Gazette gave an account that they sustained our Assault twice, but that we carried it the third time, after a vigorous Resistance. Thus 'tis honourable to have to do with a proud Enemy. We car∣ried at the same time the Tower of St. Leonard, and another which surrendred at discretion: Monsieur de Condron, the King's Lieutenant that Commanded in these Forts, escaped with 60 or 70 Men, out of 300, though he was very much wounded, after he had nailed three pieces of Cannon, which he was forced to leave in our power, and sprung a Mine, which had no effect at all. Among the Prisoners we took, those of note were Monsieur de Tromboy, Lieutenant-Colonel of the Regiment of Ponthien, one Major, three Captains, aad other Officers; but the Sieur Fronier, Lieutenant-Colonel of Angoumois, was not found in the Castle, nor amongst the Prisoners, and so it was concluded that he was killed: Our Soldiers stript all those that were killed naked, so that he could not be found. We had in this Action but 9 or 10 Soldiers killed, and some wounded.

The 15th. we changed some Batteries, with which we con∣tinued our Fire, to ruine all the Works, the Casemates, &c. of the Castle. We had several Fascines brought to fill the Ditch, and disposed all things for an Assault; about Eleven in the Evening the Duke of Holstein sent to summon the Com∣mandant to surrender and deliver to the Magisttates of the Town divers Burthers whom he detained in the Castle, contrary to the Capitulation. During this Message we had a cessation of Arms for half an hour; at which time the Officer, the Duke of Holstein had sent, returned with this Answer from the Comman∣dant, That it was not time yet to surrender, that he would stay till things were brought to a greater Extremity, that for the Burghers demanded he had reason to retain them without explaining himself any further. The Besieged did think of making a Retrenchment in the Castle, where to retreat and capitulate in case of an Assault.

The 16th. we began again, as soon as it was day, to fire from all our Batteries to make the Breach wider, and to over∣throw all the Defence the Besieged had, but we found it more
[90]
difficult than was at first believed, to bring down the heaps of Stone at the Breach.

The 17th. we continued the same Work till One in the After∣noon, that the Besieged beat the Chamade, and asked to capi∣tulate, which surprized us very much, since they might yet have defended themselves very well for some days; for though the Breach was wide enough, yet 'twas very difficult to go up to it. Hostages were Exchanged on both Sides, and the Count de Lur, Colonel of the Regiment of Angoumois, brought the Conditions in Writing to the Duke of Holstein, according to which the Commandant would deliver up the Castle, which after examination some were agreed unto, and some rejected. We would have given no other Conditions but those which the Mareschal de Villeroy had granted the Year before to the Baron de Ronesse when he took it, which caused great contestations on both Sides, and several Messages backwards and forwards. The French insisted very much to have marched out with Cannon, which was absolutely refused; but at last the Duke of Holstein sent word to Monsieur de Regnac, If that Night passed without accepting the Conditions he had prescribed, that the next Morning he would make a general Assault upon the Place, without any regard to the said Conditions; which Message had the success we expected; for the Count de Lur came about Mid-night to the Duke of Holstein with Monsieur de Regnac's Cousent to the said Articles, which I shall here insert for the satisfaction of the Reader, as they were proposed by Monsieur de Regnac, and granted by the Duke of Holstein Ploen.

[91]
The Capitulation Granted by the Duke of Holstein Ploen Commanding the Confede∣rate Army before Huy, to Monsieur de Regnac, Commandant for the French King in the Castle of Huy.

I. THat the Garrison shall go out of the place with Arms and Baggage, Drums beating, Colours flying, Matches lighted at both ends, and that they shall march out of the Breach. Granted.

II. That they shall carry out along with them Two Brass Pieces of Cannon and Mortars which are in the place, which shall be at the choice of the Commandant of the Castle. Rejected.

III. That the Garrison with the Artillery, the Officers of the State-Major, the Commissaries of War, the In∣geniers and Commissaries of the Artillery, &c. and ge∣nerally all those that are imployed in the Kings Service in the said Castle, shall march out to morrow at Nine a Clock in the Morning, with Monsieur de Regnac, to be conducted to Namur by water, with their Equipage, Baggage, Sick and VVounded, at the Charges of the Allies, who shall cause Boats to be provided, with Boat∣men and Horses, and a good Escorte of One Hundred Horsemen for their safety, which shall be ready to mor∣row by Nine in the Morning, to go that same Day to Namur. Granted thus far by the Duke of Holstein. That Boats shall be provided for Baggage for the Sick and VVounded that are in a condition to go out of the Garrison, but the rest mentioned in this Article shall
[92]
march on foot to Namur, by the shortest road under a good Escorte, and shall go out to Morrow by Nine at farthest in the Morning.

IV. That the Sick and VVounded who are not in a condition to be transported to Namur shall remain in the Town to be dressed and looked after at the expence of the Allies, till they are able to go back to their several Posts, and then they shall have sufficient Passports for their Journey. Granted.

V. That the Deserters shall not be reclam'd on either side. Rejected.

VI. That all Officers and Soldiers that have been made Prisoners during the Siege shall be set at liberty without Ransom. Granted, for those only that were made Prisoners during the Siege of the Castle.

VII. That no Officer or Soldier shall be Arrested for Debts, or otherwise; nor any other Persons comprehend∣ed in this Capitulation. So far agreed unto by the Duke of Holstein: That this Article shall be regula∣ted according as the French observed it when they took Huy; but 'tis understood, that if the Officers owe any thing to the Burghers of the Town, that the Governour shall oblige himself for the payment.

VIII. That we shall not command nor expect any re∣stitution of the Provisions which might have been taken in the Town or Neighbouring Villages to put in the Castle or otherwise. Granted.

IX. That we shall not search nor visit any Equipages belonging to the Officers or others marching out of the Castle. Granted.

X. That after the Signing of the Capitulation, the Hostages shall be restored on both sides. Granted.

[93]
XI. That when this Capitulation shall be Signed, the Duke of Holstein may send Fifty Men to take possession of the Gate of the Castle which has a Draw-Bridge. The Gate of the Castle shall be possessed this Day by One Hundred Men; and the Besieged shall leave all the Magazines in the state they are now; and they shall shew to the Hostages sent, the place and state of their Mines, and that faithfully.

The same Day that the Garrison began to Capitulate, the Duke of Holstein Norbourg, and Brigadier Dedem, came to the Camp before Huy, with the Ten Regiments that had been sent from our main Army at Rouselar, viz. the Rhingrave, Birken∣feldt, Dumont, Heukelom, Dedem, Holstein-Norbourg, Gohr, Holstein-Beck and Sparre, of which we have given an account before

According to the Capitulation Monsieur de Regnac marched out of the Castle between Nine and Ten in the Morning by the Breach, at the head of his Garrison, consisting of about Seven Hundred Men carrying Arms, which remained of Thirteen or Fourteen Hundred, they had at the beginning of the Siege; they had about Three Hundred wounded. The Governour Regnac Complemented the Duke of Holstein as he passed by him, which the Duke returned very civilly. We had the news in our Camp that the Breach was so difficult that the Garrison had much ado to march out of it, and that finding this way so difficult, the Governour would willingly have changed the First Article of the Capitulation, and have marched out of the Gate; but the Duke of Holstein answered, That Capitulations were Sacred, and exactly to be observed; and therefore since they had made their bargain to march out of the Breach, they conld not go out any other way. We obliged the French to leave Hostages for the payment of their Debts contracted in the Town; and of the Cattle which they had taken before the Siege from the Inhabitants of the Town, and neighbouring Villages. We took likewise our Deserters which were among the French in this place. The same Morning we sent a Detach∣ment
[94]
of Six Hundred Foot of the Dutch, Brandenburgh and Liege Forces to take possession of the Castle, where they entred by the Breach, the Sieur Tobie Ingenier had the command of it given him till other Orders; Brigadier Lindeboom was made Governour of the Town. 'Tis a very wonderful thing that during the Siege we had not above Forty Men kill'd and wound∣ed, no Officer killed, and none wounded but a Brandenburgh Major, which adds very much to the Reputation of the Gene∣ral; that he has in so little time, and with so little loss, reduc'd a place to the Allies which the French had taken as much care as they could to fortifie, and to furnish it with all things ne∣cessary for a good defence; notwithstanding, this place was taken in five days from the opening of the Trenches, which is no longer than the Baron de Ronesse defended it last Year against the French. 'Twas invested by the Mareschal de Villeroy the 9th, the Trench was opened the 10th, and the Castle surren∣der'd the 14th of July; though the Fort Picard was not then quite finished, and that the Enemy hath since added the Fort Rouge, both which are situated upon the points of Hills which commanded the Castle; 'tis true that since we had made our selves Masters of these two Forts, they so much commanded the Castle, that the Enemy could not perswade the Soldiers to stand Sentry upon the Ramparts, but they kept themselves close under cover as much as they could. The Governour could expect no relief, and that I believe was the reason why he would not defend the place to the last extremity. The French could not relieve it from Flanders, because they could not make a sufficient Detachment without hazarding Ipres, and other Towns on this side; and Prince Louis of Baden passed the Rhine much about the same time, so that he could not expect any succour from the Mareschal de Lorge, who was obliged to keep all his Forces against Prince Louis of Baden, who was on this side of the Rhine in the Enemies Country. As soon as we had taken possession of the Castle, the Clergy, Religious, and In∣habitants of the Town went to the chief Church (which has a Chapter consisting of a Dean and Secular Canons) where Te Deum was sung for their deliverance from the French Yoke, and for being restor'd to their Lawful Prince the Bishop, but now
[95]
(the See being vacant) to the Dean and Chapter of Liege, that had the Administration of the Government, as usually till the Bishop Elect had his Confirmation from Rome. The Dean and Chapter of Liege had likewise Te Deum sung in the Cathedral Church of St. Lambert, and a triple discharge of all the Canon round the Town, to express their joy for the reduction of this place to the Government of Liege. But before I part with the Siege of Huy, I cannot omit to shew the importance and conse∣quence of it to the Allies. We have already spoken of the great inconveniences we suffered by having Liege for our Fron∣tier Garrison, which being a very large place, situated amongst Hills, requir'd a good Army for its defence; so that whilst Liege was our Frontier, we could not well act defensively a∣gainst the Enemy, because it took up those Men within it for its defence which should have been required elsewhere: That very Army which the Duke of Holstein had before it, was but the Garrison of Liege, and some Regiments of Maestricht; and though we exceeded the French Army by much, including these Forces of Liege, yet as long as the French had Huy, they could still hinder the junction of these Forces with us, or else the Town of Liege must be left exposed to them. But we having advanc'd our Frontier by the taking of this place, a small Garri∣son will serve Liege, and as much as will keep the Citadels will be sufficient; so that by the taking of Huy, we can without raising One Man, have above Twenty Battalions more in the Field the next Campagne. This is sufficient to shew the Con∣sequence of Huy, and of what Importance it is to either side.

It is now time to return from the Siege of Huy, to our Camp at Rouselar, and to bring things to the conclusion of the Cam∣pagne. The King, as we have said, left the Army here the 20th, and went that day by Deinse and Ghendt to Overmeere, where His Majesty lay that night; but at his passing by my Lord of Athlones Quarters, where the Dutch Cavalry was can∣ton'd, the King order'd Major-General Hubert to go and com∣mand the Body of Horse and Dragoons we had by Aeth, in the absence of Count Tilly, who (as we have said before) had been taken Prifoner from his very Quarters by a Detachment of the Enemies from the Garrison of Mons.

[96]
The 21th the First Troop of Guards, Commanded by my Lord of Scarborough, was sent to quarter at Breda, and the Horse-Granadiers to Bois le duc; and now some Regiments went off daily from the Camp to go into Winter-Quarters.

The 22th we made a Detachment to cover our Soldiers, who went to marode up and down the Country; which before occa∣sioned many of them to be taken Prisoners by the Enemy; for the Country hereabours abounded in all manner of Fruits, but Roots especially, as Turnips, Parsnips and Potatoes; but when they began to grow scarce near the Camp, the Soldiers could not be hinder'd from going farther to gather them, which was the cause that the Enemies Parties daily took a great many Pri∣soners; for which reason 'twas thought convenient to have set days upon which the Soldiers should have liberty, a Man of a Tent, to go and gather Roots and Fruits, and a Detachment was order'd out of the Army to cover them; but some greater inconveniencies happened by this way, for which reason 'twas since left off. If the Camp at Rouselar was strong and secure, so that we could make what Detachments we pleased from thence, yet in other cases 'twas very inconvenient; the Coun∣try all about it was close and Woody, which shelter'd the Ene∣mies Parties, which were so frequent that our Sulters under∣went great hazards to get Provisions for the Camp; and our Bread-Waggons were several times attack•d by these Parites; for the Train of the Bread-Waggons and Sutlers who took the opportnnity of Convoys, made a Line of such length through the narrow ways of this Country, that 'twas impossible for our Detachments to cover them all along; so that the Enemies Parties, which lay in the Woods, would often sally out when they saw their opportunity, and take the Horses from the Wag∣gons, which was all they look▪d for, and so run away with their booty as fast as they could; about this time a Party of the Enemy attack'd our Bread-Waggons, but part of our De∣tachment which was near, hindered them from stealing any Horses; yet being in close Ambuscade they fired upon our Men, where Captain Sacheverel of Colonel Titcombs Regiment, that commanded this part of the Detachment, had the misfortune to be wounded mortally; which is the only Officer of our Army I have heard of, that has been killed this Campagne by the Enemy.

[97]
The 23th the King, who had left the Camp at Rouselar the 20th, came to Liege the 23th about Noon; His Majesty was waited upon by Deputies from the Chapter to Complement Him upon his arrival to this place, and by Prince Cerclas of Tilly, the Liege General, and the Cannon was fir'd all round the Town. His Majesty did not go into the place, but only rid round the Lines and Works to see the condition they were in, and how far His Majesty could depend upon them, whereby to take His Measures for the next Campagne. That Evening the King went to Maestricht, and lay in the Duke of Holstein-Ploens house (the Governour) which had been prepar'd for His Majesties recep∣tion; and the next day the King went on to Loo, where His Majesty arrived the 26th to take his usual Divertisements after the closing of the Campagne.

The 25th we sent a reinforcement from the Camp at Rouselar of Thirty Gunners and Matrosses, with Stores to Dixmuyde.

The 26th the Elector of Bavaria and Prince Vaudemont left the Army early in the Morning to go to Brussels, 16 Men being commanded out of each Battalion, by Two in the Morning, to Escorte his Electoral Highness as far as Deinse, from whence relays were ready upon the Road by Ghendt to Brussels. The Command of the Army remain'd now to the D. of Wirtemberg, who had thereupon the Honours paid him which are given to a General in Chief. The same day the Army had Orders to forage all the Churches and Cloisters in our Front towards the Enemy, and to take all their Corn (as we had before) to leave the Ene∣mies Country hereabouts as bare as we could.

The 28th the Bavarian Foot and Dragoons marched away from the Camp to go into Quarters; they were incamped upon the heighth of Hooghleode, where they flank'd our Right, and cover'd the Electors Quarters; but because this Hill commanded our Camp, 5 Battalions of the Brigade of Rantzow and Dedem were sent the same day to incamp in their places, to defend the Redoubts which we had made at our first coming to fortifie this Hill against the Enemy. The same day the Barracks of the Battalion of the Second Regiment of English Guards (whereof my Lord Cuts is now Colonel in the room of the late Lieutenant-General Taldmash) took fire, the wind drove the flame to the Left, where it chanced to be advanced forward to the Front of
[98]
the Dutch Guards, or else the fire might have done more mis∣chief in our Straw-Camp, which is very dangerous, when an Army is thus hutted all along in Straw.

The 29th the D. of Holstein-Ploen came back from the Siege of Huy to the Camp, to command the Army; he was Com∣plemented by all the Generals upon his arrival, and the good success he had at Huy: the Mareschal de Luxemburgh sent him a Complement of 2 very fine Mules. The D. of Holstein at his coming away from Huy dispersed the Troops imployed in the Siege. The Baron de Heyden was sent to incamp near Liege by the Ourte, which rises in the Pajis de Luxemburgh, and passes through the Dutchy of Bouillon, and bois d' Ardenne, and so falls into the Meuse at Liege. Lieutenant-General de Witz was sent with the Brandenburgh Horse and Dragoons towards the Pajis de Luxemburgh, to raise Contributions in the Enemies Country, and the Dutch Foot commanded by Major-General Cohorne remained incamped by Huy till the Breaches were re∣paired; of which six Battalions, and two of the Liege Foot were sent into the Town and Castle, to keep a strong Garrison in the place, which is now our Frontier to the Enemy.

The 30th the Second Troop of Life-Guards commanded by the D. of Ormond, and the Third by my L. Rivers, marched out of the Camp towards their Winter-Quarters at Breda. The French which now wanted Forage very much by their long con∣tinuance in their Camp between Courtray and Moorselle, made a considerable Detachment to the other side of the Scheld between Mons and Tournay, commanded by the Mareschal de Bouflers, to subsist them more conveniently there; and Major-General Hu∣bert, who commanded our Detachment of Horse and Dragoons near Aeth, was now marched towards Wavre and Genap: It may be the Enemy suspected some design against Charleroy by this motion, for which reason the Mareschal de Bouflers was commanded with this Body towards Mons.

[ October] October 1. All our heavy Artillery was sent to Ghendt (and none remained but the light Field-pieces) under the Convoy of the Battalion of the Second Regiment of Guards, whose Barraques had been burnt (for which reason they were now sent to Winter-Quarters at Ghendt) and the Regiments of Tettan, Salisch and
[99]
Bieck which marched to Maestricht. Colonel Titcomb had this day the same misfortune the Second Regiment of Guards had some days before.

The 3d our Bread-Waggons were again set upon by the Ene∣mies Parties, and as they made a false attack upon the Center of the Waggons, where our Detachment came for relief, they had the opportunity to steal several Horses from the Front. Our Camp was so far towards the Enemies Frontier Garrisons, that Courtray was nearer Ghendt, from whence we had our Bread, than Rouselar. This, with the closeness of the ground in our Rear, made the Enemies Parties very successful, who had all the advantage they could desire, for such undertakings. But if the Camp of Rouselar was a perfect Wood when we came to it, in∣somuch that any Regiment could not discover the Line upon the Right or Left; yet before we parted with it we made it a Plain, for above half an English Mile in the Front and Rear. The Sol∣diers cut down the Wood and Hedges to build their Huts, and afterwards to burn and make fires withal. 'Twas really pity to see many fine Trees and stately Oaks cut down, and yet these are the least inconveniencies a Country suffers, that is the un∣happy and miserable seat of War. This reflection ought to make us set the greatest value in the World upon our domestick Peace, and to let War be any where else (whatever it may cost us) ra∣ther than have it at home; and if the mischiefs of War are so great, that when David was put to his choice of Punishments for his Sin, he chose rather the Pestilence, or to be chasten'd by the hand of God, than to have a War at home: Certainly those are to be look'd upon as the most unnatural monsters in the world, who would disturb the Peace of our Government under any pretext whatsoever; and yet so much the more when 'tis only to satisfie their own ambitious revenge or discontent.

The 5th the Regiments that were to be Quartered at Aude∣narde marched out of the Field to go to their Garrison.

The 6th the whole Army began to separate in order to march into Winter-Quarters; the Garrisons of Bruges, Ostend and Sluys, marched away under the command of Major-General Ramsay, and all the heavy Baggage of the remainder of the Army was sent away under the Escorte of the Regiments of Noyelles, Oxen∣sterne, St. Paul and Marquet, which marched to Brussels; and
[100]
the next day the whole Camp broke up at Rousetar: We had a good Rear-guard to cover our March, but the Enemy did not appear to disturb it; and so all the Regiments marched towards their several Quarters that had been assigned them.

The 9th the Mareschal de Luxemburgh came to view our Camp at Rousclar, with the Mareschal de Villeroy, and 4000 Horse of the French Kings Houshold; 'twas supposed his design was to disturb the Quarters of our English Cavalry canton'd about Dix∣muyde; but my L. Auverquerque gave such Orders for the de∣fence of their Quarters, that the Mareschal de Luxemburgh did not think convenient to attack them, and so he went back again to his Camp at Courtray to give Orders for the separation of the French Army into their Winter-Quarters, which tho' they had been now above 7 weeks in this Camp, yet they could not stir from it till our Army had left the field. My L. of Athlone march∣ed with the Dutch Cavalry from his Quarters near Deinse to∣wards Ninove, to cover the Works we made at this place, and Gramont upon the Dender, to make them serve for a Winter-Quarter, and to lodge our Troops as near as possibly we could to the Enemies Frontiers. The D. of Holstein, after the separa∣tion of our Army, went to wait upon the King at the Hague, (where His Majesty arrived the 13th from Loo) and the General Officers to their respective Quarters where they command.

The 14th and 15th the French Army left the Camp of Cour∣tray to go into Winter-Quarters, and the Mareschals of Lux∣emburgh and Villeroy went away for the Court; but the Mares∣chal of Bouflers staid to take possession of his New Government of Lifle, and the French Flanders.

About the 16th. all the Cavalry and Dragoons left the Vil∣lages where they were cantoned, to go into their Quarters, and Dixmuyde being in a condition of defence, not only the English Horse and Dragoons marched into Quarters, but the five Re∣giments that had their Quarters assigned them in the Comerlings Ambacht, which had been sent here to forward the Work of the Fortification▪ Count Thian separated his Army from Deinse, which was now fortified, and Four Regiments were left in the place under the Command of Brigadier Offarrel.

The Army being newly separated into Quarters on both fides, I shall only beg leave to make some Reflections upon the pre∣sent
[101]
state of Affairs, which may serve to close up this Narrative. The Scale of War had inclined very much in the former Cam∣pagnes to France, and the French King has had very great suc∣cess against the Allies; but the Event of this Campagne is sufficient to convince them, that if the French have had success, it has been because they did not make their best Efforts in a vigorous prosecution of the common Cause: For now, that the Allies have been sensible of the necessity of augmenting their Forces, we find the Scale to turn. The Enemy, who before were very stirring and active upon our Frontiers, have been forced this Year to preserve their own, and think they have made a good Campagne, when they have been about Eleven Weeks of it imcamped under the Cannon of their own Garri∣sons; a Month by Huy, and above seven Weeks between Courtray and Menin; and yet have not been able to act so far defensively, as to hinder us from taking of Huy, a Place of equal importance to both Sides. The Mareschal de Lorges (notwithstanding the great Matters the Turks expected from their Allie against the Empire) has been forced to keep on this side of the Rhine almost all the Campagne, and to suffer Prince Lovis of Baden to pass this River, and raise Contributions in Alsatia; and in all likelihood more would have been done, if the apprehensions we had for Hungary at that time, and the sudden Swelling of the Rhine, had not obliged Prince Lovis to re pass the River. The Mareschal of Catinat has done as little in Savoy; he has acted wholly upon the defensive, to secure Provence and Dauphine from an Invasion▪ There was nothing left but Catalonia for the French King to talk of Con∣quests and Victories, and the Success due to the Justice of his Arms, which has been his last Shift; where he has chosen rather to consume and ruine an Army by the intemperateness of a hot Climate, than want a Te Deum in the Great Church of Paris to keep up the Hearts of his Subjects. It has appeared by all that has passed in this War, that the French King loves much more the Laurels that grow in Flanders, upon the Rhine, or in Piedmont, than those which Catalonia affords; so that Gironne and Palamos are but a Shift to cover a weakened Power: And I believe that those who know the state of Spain, don't think the French King much the greater Conquerour for it: But yet we
[102]
have had this Advantage by it, That the French King has been forced to discover his Weakness at Sea, in a Place where he had hitherto rid, Neptune-like, Lord and Sovereign of it, and our Fleet no sooner appeared in the Mediterranean, but the Mareschal de Tourville thought fit to leave that Sea to our Power, and retired into the Habour of Thoulon.

If therefore it appears by the Event of this Campagne, that the French Power and Greatness does begin to abate, it ought to give the greatest incouragement in the world to the Allies, to act so much the more vigorously in the prosecution of this present War. If the Efforts of the Fren̄ch begin to lessen, let not ours be the weaker for it; but on the contrary, let them be so much the stronger, and the more powerful. This will be the way to make a quick and happy End of the War, and to procure a solid and lasting Peace, which is the only de∣sign the Allies propose to themselves in this present War; which is so just, so good and laudable, and so much becoming Christians, that if we will act our part as we ought to do, we may justly expect God's blessing upon it. The Experience the World has had of Lovis XIV. since the beginning of his Reign, is sufficient to convince all Mankind, that as long as his Power is so great, as his Encroachments upon his Neighbours have made it, 'tis in vain to expect a solid and durable Peace. If we survey his History from the beginning of this Monarch's Reign, we shall find, that the longest Peace he has had with his Neighbours, has not lasted Seven Years, which was from the Pyrenean Treaty to 1667. That all along he had invaded the Dominions and States of his Neighbours, without any re∣gard to Treaties, though never so sacred; and therefore if we should let this Opportunity slip, can we expect a lasting Peace so long as he has Power sufficient to disturb it when he pleases? I dare say, that the French King's own Subjects, if they value the Peace and Quiet of Christendome, must be concerned them∣selves, and have an interest in the common Cause of the Allies, which has no other end but to procure it; and consequently, that they themselves are sensible of the necessity of the French King's Power to be less in order to obtain it.

I shall yet beg leave to address my self to Englishmen in par∣ticular, who have so great an interest in the present War, that
[103]
our Religion and Liberties cannot be reckoned upon a sure Basis, nor our Nation flourish, so long as the French Power is so great; therefore 'tis absolutely our interest to use our utmost endeavours to make it less; whatever it may cost us, yet we cannot pay too dear for it. If we should not take hold of this occasion, and use our utmost endeavours to compass an End so beneficial to the Honour, Safety, and flourishing of the Nation, what will our Posterity say of us, when it may be they have those Fetters on which 'tis now in our power to break, nay which is worse, which we may live to wear our selves, and to be wise too late? If such miserable Times should happen through our neglect of this present Occasion, will not our Po∣sterity curse our Memory, if we do not live to blame our selves for it? If we justly condemn our former Governments, be∣cause they have suffered France to arrive to a Power so preju∣dicial to our Safety and Interest, when they might, and ought, to have hindred it, should not we justly deserve the most igno∣minious Character that can be printed upon paper, if we neg∣lect so fair an opportunity as this, to assert the Honour and Credit of our Nation, and to Establish our own Religion and Liberty upon a sure Foundation? We make so considerable a Figure in this present War, and England has such a share in it, that by our vigorous prosecution of it, we shall not only secure our Rights and Liberties, but we shall have the Credit, under the Care of our Wise, Great, and Just Monarch, to free the rest of Christendom from Slavery; which will gain our Nation such a Credit, Renown, and Reputation abroad, as will make England flourish (when we have compassed a Lasting and Solid Peace) more than ever it has done hitherto, and it will abun∣dantly repay our present Charges with Interest. And at the same time that the French King's Efforts are less, since his Offers of Peace are dayly so much the greater, we may reasonably expect, that if we do our duty as we ought, in this present Con∣juncture, we shall soon compass this wish'd for, firm, and Lasting Peace.

[104]
A List of the Winter Quarters for the King's Forces, for the Year, 1694.

INFANTRY.
GHENDT: The Three Battalions of English Guards, Fitzpatrick, Frederic Hamilton, Collingwood, La Meloniere, Danish Guards, Prince Frederic, Prince George, Zealand, Fuknen Packmoer, or Branden∣bourg, Nassau.
BRƲGES: Regiment of Scots Guards, Royal Regiment, Lloyd, Cuts now Colonel Seymour, Rada, Brewer, Titcomb, Collier, Castleton, In∣goldesby. Note, that the Three Regiments of Seymour, Rada, and Collier, came over from England the latter end of August, and have not been in the Field this Year.
MALINES: Churchil, Trelawney, Granville, Erle.
DENDERMOND: Selwyn, Stanley.
OSTEND: St. George, Mackay, Graham.
DIXMƲYDE: Belcastel, Marton, Queen of Denmark, Prince Christian, Jutland, Aver.
DEINSE: Offerrel, Lauder, Strathnaver, George Hamilton.
DAMME: Argyle.
In the Villages of Willebrook▪ and near Canal of Brusselles, the Two Battalions of Dutch Guards.
In the Camerling's 'Ambacht, or Villages near the Canal of Newport, Lesley, Tiffeny, Maitland, Ferguson, Buchan.
LEER: St. Paul, Lewenhaupt, Guards of Hanover.
AƲDENARDE: Guards of Wolfembuttel, Hering.
In the Villages of Musen and Heuens, Cinquilles.
CAVALRY.
BREDA: Portland, Searborough, Ormond, Rivers, Life-Guards.
HAGƲE: Auverquerque, Life-Guards.
BOISLEDƲC: Horse-Granadiers.
GHENDT: Lumley, Schomberg, Coy, Langston, Wood, Galloway, Windham, Leveson, Wirtemberg, La Forrest, Zeestadt.
BRƲGES: Zuglenstein, Boncourt, Schack, Vittinghof, Tennaghel, Being the Regiment that was lately Scravenmoor's.
St. GERTRƲDENBERG: Montpouillan.
In the Villages between Ghendt and the Sas Van Ghendt, Eppinger, Mathews, Levingston, Fairfax, Essex, Wynne, Cunningham, Dragoons.
FINIS.